Welcome to lesson one on the instruments of Canada's foreign policy. We will learn about what’s called liberal or Pearsonian internationalism. This is the first lecture. It gives you an idea of the pacing, of the focus. You can see the captions do not correctly translate what I am saying. PowerPoint's captions are very poor, and it would take me too much time to fix the captions. Instead, we will use YouTube. I will export this to a YouTube channel and you can watch it in English or any language that you like. YouTube is responsible for the correct caption; I am not. What I say and what I show you on the PowerPoint is what will be tested, not the incorrect captions below. Let's launch into our first mainly historical lecture.

We're going to begin with the Golden Age of Canadian diplomacy. So we're going back to the 1940s and the 1950s, and the reason for that is because of the influence of Mike Pearson, or Lester Pearson—that was his official name, Mike Pearson—and he was the Under-Secretary of State for External Affairs. We used to call the Department of Foreign Affairs the Department of Global Affairs, and before that was the Department of External Affairs. So, I'm just mentioning that because he was the most senior diplomat for a very long time, and then he became the leader—the official leader of the opposition. So he headed the Liberal Party for many years, and then finally he was elected Prime Minister in 1963, right after the Cuban Missile Crisis, until 1968. So you can see he wrote three volumes of memoirs, which are all very interesting, and then you can see some pictures there of him, including a statue.

So the Golden Age is so important that that statue is featured in front of the Parliament in Ottawa. And there are so many Canadian diplomats that were hailed around the world. Of course, they were all men, but at that time men went to work in the 1940s and '50s, and women—there were no women diplomats, which is extremely interesting in hindsight. So who were the male diplomats that were so famous? There were many of them: Escott Reid, who wrote quite a few books later; John Holmes wrote many books; George Ignatieff—I'm going to show you a book; Norman Robertson was quiet but he was very senior; Arnold Heeney, whom I'll show you in a minute, a picture of; O.D. Skelton; Hume Wrong; and Basil Robinson, whom I had the honor of interviewing many years ago.

So here's a picture of Lester Pearson at the... on... wearing the bow tie, which he often wore. And then in the middle was the Secretary... uh, I'm sorry, what am I saying? Anthony Eden from the United Kingdom, and Dean Acheson on the right. So he was the Secretary of State for the United States. So this is a very senior meeting.

Here are some more pictures. You can see Lester Pearson laughing up at the top, back row. And you can see in the middle various people, including John Foster Dulles in the middle, C.D. Howe—very famous diplomats.

There is another picture. So you can see, you're getting the idea that Pearson enjoyed himself. He talked about baseball; he was a happy guy, everyone enjoyed being with him. There's Dwight Eisenhower, the President, and then the Prime Minister of Canada, Louis St. Laurent, before Diefenbaker.

Then one final picture here of Arnold Heeney, who was the Under-Secretary of State when he was just coming out there of Parliament in 1949 after the war. And Pearson, the Golden Age... and it led finally to, uh, Pearson at the United Nations getting the Nobel Peace Prize, which I'm going to talk to you about. He's... eye... again, in 1952, the President of the, um, Security Council, the rotating U.N. Security Council.

So why did the Golden Age end? There are a lot of reasons. There was, of course, the rise of the superpower rivalry and the beginning of the Cold War, but there was also the rise of other middle powers like Canada. So other countries like Brazil and India and Mexico came to the fore, and Canada fell down in comparison to them. We also had the Marshall Plan—maybe we'll have a Marshall Plan 2.0 for Ukraine? I've just written an article on that in the Hill Times, but it's the idea that we would re-impose the Marshall Plan and have one for Ukraine. So why did it succeed? Billions of dollars went into France and Germany and into the other smaller powers. There was also less reliance on international institutions like the UN, as there is today.

Who was famous? I mentioned some of them, but another famous diplomat was George Ignatieff, pictured here, who was very much into peace. His son Michael Ignatieff ran for Prime Minister. So George was fluently bilingual in Russian and in English. There's Pearson again, bow tie.

So what were the main accomplishments there? In hindsight, probably the establishment of NATO at that time with 12 members, and the imposition of the Canadian Article 2, which asked for economic and social collaboration and cooperation. So they really emphasized Article 2. John Foster Dulles did not want to insert it into the Washington Treaty, but in pressure by the Canadian diplomats, who were so good at what they did, brought that in. Now, in hindsight, it's Article 5, which I've talked to you about, that is so important. We also had, under... in the Golden Age, the establishment of U.N. peacekeeping forces. So I'm going to talk to you more about that—the Blue Helmets.

We need to return back to the Suez Crisis. And it seems people keep saying right now, "Oh, the Ukraine crisis and the Korea crisis..." Could we have a crisis... two crises? Could we have a Taiwan Straits crisis? So what they're referring back to is two crises way back in 1956. One was over the Suez Canal. The Suez Canal shapes and controls the flow of oil, so it shortens the export of oil from the Middle East to Europe and to the United States. The problem was that Egypt planned to build a huge dam called the Aswan Dam—it's now built—and the United States and the United Kingdom suddenly withdrew their financing of the dam. So this made the leader of Egypt very, very angry, and so he decided to nationalize the dam, which was too risky.

So here's the Suez Canal. You can see it is going between the Red Sea—where is my pen? Uh, here we are—and going into the Mediterranean Sea to get out to Europe. And this is a picture of it from... from the... from... not space, but fairly high.

The Suez Crisis happened at the same time as the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics—the former Russia, now the Russian Federation—invaded Hungary. And they invaded in 1956 with pretty well no notice, just like this invasion of Ukraine crisis. So it came as a complete surprise. You can see that President Eisenhower and the U.S. Secretary of State whom I just showed you, John Foster Dulles in the State Department, were taken by surprise. They decided... what to do? Well, they did not realize that the French and the Israelis and the United Kingdom were secretly meeting to discuss a detailed timetable, without telling their NATO allies of what they planned to do. They planned to invade.

So Israeli forces crossed the canal and they attacked Egypt on October 29, 1956. So this came as a complete surprise to everyone. There were negotiations at the U.N.; meanwhile, these great powers were negotiating or were secretly planning to attack Egypt. There's a picture of the canal again, and some pictures from the 1950s of the different coalitions and so on.

The U.S. officials and the Canadian officials recognized that the Israeli attack had a lot of implications. It wasn't just Israeli, but it was also United Kingdom and France. It could turn the Arab world against the West; it would aid the USSR in terms of propaganda; it would divide NATO; and it would undermine the United Nations. So they were very shocked that even though they were having these negotiations at the United Nations, the United Kingdom, France, and Israel had lied about their intentions.

What to do? Pearson... I put a picture of him thinking, thinking, thinking, thinking. He can see that there's four huge shifting things to remember here. First of all, cooperation among the United Kingdom and France—Canada's mother countries. So the United Kingdom and France were our mother countries then. And cooperation with the United States—our closest neighbor and a superpower—was threatened. So he's thinking about the shifting superpower and middle power alliances. And he's concerned, obviously; he's worried NATO can fall apart. He had tried to put NATO together. The United Nations, which he worked on for so long, was also being undermined and threatened by this. The Commonwealth, which Canada was a part of and continues to be a part of—the English-speaking world ruled at that time by the Queen, Queen Elizabeth—this could also be divided. And to add to it, add to the crisis, the USSR attack on Hungary was a problem.

So in 1956, it looked as if the West was going to simply allow the USSR to use force to settle disputes, just like today where the West has allied strongly against the Russian Federation, and even in Europe, despite gas shortages and despite problems, the West is allied. So Pearson was idealistic; he was what's called a Liberal Internationalist. And that's why Canadians are seen as different from Americans: because of our Liberal Internationalism. I'm going to explain this in more detail because you are the inheritors of that philosophy, which competes against the USSR idea of invasion and the Russian idea of invasion and the use of armed force.

Pearson's ideas were lauded. Pearson received the Nobel Peace Prize in 1958. Actually, I've got to correct that because... he... for his behavior in 1957, but he got it in 1958. And he helped establish the United Nations Emergency Force. The general who helped him was E.L.M. Burns—he was a Canadian general and he was in charge of UNEF 1. So there's Dag Hammarskjöld; he was killed later, he was a great poet as well. So there you can see Dag Hammarskjöld talking to Lester Pearson about what to do, and there's Pearson holding his Nobel Peace Prize medal.

The U.S. State Department was involved behind the scenes, and this is according to different accounts by Pearson and the U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations, Henry Cabot Lodge. Lodge had the draft from the United States State Department of the idea of a Pearson peace... of a peacekeeping force. And he realized that Pearson could possibly put it out on the U.N. General Assembly stage. So he had the draft, he saw Pearson, he said the U.S. would be very gratified if Canada would sponsor the resolution. Pearson speedily read it, quickly made up his mind, saw the hidden meanings and hooks, and he sponsored it in the U.N. General Assembly. So according to Henry Cabot Lodge, "I have never seen a man in a forum pick up and comprehend a complicated thing of far-reaching implications, and then get recognized and get the floor and propose it immediately." So here I ask you: Did he deserve the prize? Yes. He put in place an idea—it had been circulating for a long time since the 1940s—but he put in place an idea whose time had come.

And that's what we're going to be talking about today: the ideas that you have in your toolbox. Because you may get the opportunity at some point to put your idea in place—the idea you have in your toolbox. You may get the... you may get the Nobel Peace Prize. You might become Prime Minister. Imagine that.

So here you can see Lester Pearson with a Trudeau and a diplomat and a politician, greatly admired all around the world. There are more books—I mean, imagine, more books, so many books written on you.

Oh, let's talk about some other lessons that Pearson didn't really want to talk about as much, but these are lessons from the Vietnam War from the 1960s. Canada was involved in Indochina—that was the old name for Vietnam—way back since the 1950s and the Geneva Conference. But those international commissions just did not work. So Canadian opposition to the war began to rise in the 1960s. But in 1965, due to the U.S. bombing of the Vietcong—which was the group in Vietnam that was fighting—and the U.S. bombing of North Vietnam, which was terrible, Pearson's famous speech at that time is called his Temple University speech, and it departed from his usual policy of quiet diplomacy. You saw how he worked behind the scenes at the U.N. and at NATO and negotiated quietly. He was an advocate of quiet diplomacy.

So here's a picture, this famous picture of an absolute assassin killing, which was in the newspapers. And there's a movie... there's many movies you can watch on the Vietnam War. That's from a movie.

So Pearson's speech in the middle of the Vietnam War was quite surprising, actually. He did it in the President's own backyard, and he was very critical. He said that there should be a pause in the bombing in the interests of peace and negotiations and a ceasefire. So Canada's Ambassador to the United States, Charles Ritchie—who wrote many books later—was summoned to an angry meeting with the U.S. President, Lyndon Johnson, and an advisor who was also quite famous, McGeorge Bundy, at Camp David. There, the U.S. President bellowed at the Canadian Prime Minister. The Ambassador Charles Ritchie engaged in a spat, a fighting argument, and back at the cottage, Ritchie wrote that he saw Johnson grab Pearson by the shirt, which is quite offensive, really. I mean, can you imagine if Joe Biden... we can't even imagine this. But anyway, Ritchie phoned him and congratulated him and suggested, "Maybe what shall we do?" Pearson was calm, but Ritchie got the feeling he was quite shaken. I'm sure he was.

So what did he decide to do? He chose to defuse the matter with a conciliatory letter. So we're going to be talking in your toolbox about using letters to diplomats and to embassies, and we're going to talk about letters. But this is a classic letter here where Pearson wrote that his proposal had been because of Canada being a political democracy and so on. So it was conciliatory, peaceful.

That leads me to talk about the theoretical framework of Liberal Internationalism. So what are its main tenets? And its main diplomats are John Holmes and many of the people from the Golden Age. The first argument or first tenet is that Canada should act as a middle power. That means that we should try to negotiate for the superpowers; we should try to compromise on resolutions, be conciliatory; we should try to reduce tensions; and lobby. People around the world see Canada as an interlocutor because of our vast geography between the United States and Russia. They see us as being peaceful. We're always saying "sorry, sorry." Some people call this Humane Internationalism.

There you can see a book by John Holmes. I remember listening to him. He would talk out his speeches in the Canadian Institute for International Affairs, and I would just listen to him speaking out his books. It was amazing; these men could write really well. So there's some more books by J.L. Granatstein.

The idea that was important to Liberal Internationalism was functionalism. It conflicts in a way with the idea of Canada's middle power, because here it says that we can restrict membership in institutions to those who are interested. So, for example, on the Law of the Sea, we should have negotiations just among those countries that have a lot of sea. If we have a lot of resources on something, then those countries should negotiate. So you can see that conflicts with the concept of sovereign equality at the United Nations and equal representation, but functionalism was popular because people thought, "That's how we can avert great power hegemony; we will argue for functionalism." It does conflict with middle-powership, though.

The next important idea was that Canada should play a mediatory role. That means rather than being an apologist for the United States or being a puppet or a lackey, Canadians and diplomats should strive to obtain compromises and solutions to world problems. Which is why we're going to be doing our toolbox today; we're going to be trying to think about how we can mediate a gradual improvement in world order and bring about change through mediation and compromise. So there you can see those pictures I showed you before—Pearson laughing amongst all these men—but now in a new world that we're in, maybe you can think in your toolbox of new ways to promote compromise and to promote solutions.

Getting to your toolbox, which is so important: it's important to be what's called a participatory internationalist—a person who wants to strengthen world peace, that is active in accepting international responsibilities and contributing to international organizations. So that was also... that idea of internationalism was very popular during the Golden Age, but also still is a Liberal Internationalist concept.

The concept of collective security as opposed to, or versus, collective defense: so collective security is the idea of creating and maintaining organizations to preserve peace among the members. So it's the United Nations, NATO among the members. Collective defense is a pact among the members to defend against an outsider. So NATO is also a collective defense organization.

And finally, the concepts of flexibility twinned with quiet diplomacy. These are the ideas that we should be flexible; we should react; we should not use loud megaphone diplomacy. We should use behind-the-scenes techniques of persuasion. We should never criticize on another country's soil, like Pearson did during the Temple University speech. We should try to never publicly criticize countries and leaders; we should criticize behind the scenes.

So there's some final shots. You can see John English came to my class once many years ago and gave a lecture. He wrote a number of volumes on the Pearson years. If you could make these same guidelines that Pearson did, and you could play this kind of a role on the world stage, you can use these same concepts and ideas in new wording or the same wording, and you can forge out there in your own boat with the Canadian flag and you can try to change the world.

So these principles do have their roots in liberal ideology—small 'l', not the party Liberal, but the small 'l' liberal ideology. And it's a belief in equality and freedom and tolerance among individuals and among nations. It's this faith in humankind's power to solve our problems somehow through mediation and compromise, not through war and violence and armed conflict. It's a belief that we are progressing; that the world will become better; that humankind is not perfect now but will become perfect later and could gradually reform international institutions to become more peaceful. And finally, it's an appeal to human rationality and not to selfishness—to enlightened self-interest. That's what it appeals to, so as to obtain the harmony of interest instead of constant war.

Some final books—there are many, many books have been written by Canadians, and that's why worldwide, if you go to the United States and you speak to diplomats, they'll nod and look at you and think that you have inherited this kind of thinking pattern. Are these principles useful? Are they relevant anymore? Why or why not? And would you recommend some alternative guidelines? We'll keep thinking about that as we move through today's slides, because you're going to be making your own toolbox. Thanks for listening.