Welcome, students, to the final part—uh—the fourth part of Lesson One. This is on military instruments and non-military instruments. So we will review different types of techniques and instruments that governments, especially Canada, use.

The instruments of foreign policy are generally divided into military and non-military instruments. I'm going to divide them that way and also talk about the benefits of using the instruments, and then the potential costs of using the instruments. Rather than lecture to you at this point, I'd like you to somehow participate. And your instructions will happen as I speak, where I'd like you to think about some instruments and also their benefits and costs. So work your way through this. Although in the exam—it's a multiple choice exam—you won't be able to write your ideas; you won't be able to fill in blanks. But you are, I hope, planning to be either Foreign Service officers or maybe work in the field of Canadian government, and so take the opportunity to think this through because it will help to make you a better diplomat, I hope.

So, let's go ahead. I’ve put here a picture, and this is all the worldly goods of a person. This is a National Geographic picture, and this is everything that they own. But you own a computer; you actually have access to all the world's knowledge. Indeed, when we talk about this in class—if we were in class or in our group here, which we are—you in my class have more knowledge just among yourselves than all of the noblemen in Europe, everyone in the medieval time period. By far, you know way more. And so surely together, or just alone like this guy in the picture, you can figure out some military and non-military ideas.

Why are your ideas so important? Well, a country like Canada, we have diplomatic proposals, we have ideas. We use instruments not just from our past, but from the future. We think of ideas and we bring them to the bargaining table. Like I said, Canada is a member of more international organizations than any other country in the world.

It's time for us to begin with military instruments, which Canada tends not to use here. The most destructive, obviously, is total war—total Armageddon, the end of the world—and, as we talked about, midnight. This is the most destructive. But there can also be limited wars, so let's talk about those.

What I want you to do is go to Wikipedia or to go to any site and just look up examples of wars, lists of wars. Take a look at the United States; the number of—the United States has been involved in dozens and dozens of wars. Canada less so. And I want you to make your own list of limited wars, okay? Your list is going to be different from anybody else's. But here what we're looking at is—so that, let's say you are in the foreign policy service of, I don't know, some... Jamaica or China, or if you're working in Japan. I have no idea where you all are. Some of you are in—you are writing to me in a different time zone. Somebody just passed the midterm exam and arrived here from China. Congratulations; he did very well. I'm so pleased for him. But what I'm trying to say is I don't know where you all are, but you need to think about the benefits and the disadvantages of using limited war.

There are some advantages to limited war. I'm sure Vladimir Putin thought that there were advantages to going to war. Think of some advantages. Think of the costs of war. I know a lot about the cost of war because I look at SIPRI and I look at organizational assessments, and I'm very familiar with the costs. I tend to think less about the benefits, which is an—um—a problem.

Think about them, and then I want you to go on to think about alliances. So here, group it. I'm trying to teach you a way of thinking as well, where you are going to think in certain ways about instruments. So here we are at the point... Alliances are an instrument, like NATO, like NORAD. And then you can have permanent alliances like NATO and NORAD, or you can have temporary alliances like the Coalition of the Willing during the Gulf War, the Afghanistan Coalition during Afghanistan, and right now a temporary alliance against Ukraine—that's mainly the EU, Canada, and a lot of Western countries. Essentially 135 countries, a temporary alliance. So can you think of cases of temporary alliances? For example, if you're interested in the Middle East, are there any Saudi-led alliances? Are there any alliances in history under—uh—Hussein, pictured there? What about Queen Elizabeth and the Commonwealth?

Moving fairly quickly, you're getting the idea that you are making your own toolbox and you need to think. You can go back in history. You can go to the 1600s; you can go to the invasion of North America; you can talk about World War One, World War Two. It depends on you. But about the benefits and the costs of military alliances... Try to think about the benefits and the costs from the perspective of the leaders—the leadership that you will be advising.

Now you say to yourself, "I won't be advising anyone on military pressure." Pressure is used in all sorts of ways in all sorts of relationships. And it's the use of military power to intimidate in order to convince your adversary that it's not a good idea to take that particular action. So deterrence is one form of military pressure. It's not complicated. This involves convincing an adversary—your enemy or maybe your friend—that the costs of attack are guaranteed to be more than the cost of non-attack—non-attacking or not attacking. It's just telling someone that "if you try to attack me, the costs are going to be really high for you." Okay? So that's all you're doing: deterrence.

So what are the cases of military pressure? Here you need to go back in time. Let's say you want to go back to Louis XIV, like I have here. What are some of the causes? What are the cases of military pressure? Bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, these pictures... But you can prompt your mind by just going to Google Images and going through and looking at military pressure and the costs. And you can get distracted thinking about Queen Elizabeth's times and so on. The costs of nuclear weapons are... Books have been written on this. The costs for the world of—of—users.

Okay, I want to talk about non-military instruments because Canada is so good at this. We are incredibly good, as I lectured earlier, um, in terms of the golden age of Canadian diplomacy—in terms of using diplomatic pressure, either to approve or to disapprove. So I put a picture of George Bush here using diplomatic pressure, and the American diplomats are very good at this as well. Sometimes we say "the hand in the—the—fist in the—in the glove," or the "velvet glove" and things like that. But some of the commonly used methods are a formal letter of protest. I talked to you about that before: writing a letter, conciliatory as Pearson did, or not; withdrawing an ambassador; closing an embassy—closing our embassies in South Africa because of apartheid, closing our embassy in—in China, in Russia, cutting diplomatic relations completely. Extremely effective non-military instruments of foreign policy that you need to think about and know about. Say to your boss—let's say it's Napoleon Bonaparte here (I hope you would never have him as your boss)—but you need to give him examples of using diplomatic pressure. So he says, "Oh yeah, that's a good idea. I remember the Iraq War; Tony Blair, George Bush—they did that. Good idea."

So, I put here a picture of Yitzhak Rabin and Yasser Arafat shaking hands. Here they are actually in front of President Clinton, who brought them together at Camp David. They both got the Nobel Peace Prize for this. So think of historical cases. Hang on, think of unsuccessful cases of using diplomatic pressure. And here the one that always comes to mind is, of course, the United States' decision to invade Iraq because they thought that there were weapons of mass destruction hidden there and that Saddam Hussein would use them. Did they think that or not? We don't know. But there's Kofi Annan, the Secretary General of the United Nations, and George Bush deciding what to do. Unsuccessful case in hindsight.

Here we're thinking about the benefits and the advantages of using diplomatic pressure, which can be many. First, it's obviously less costly. Here we have a Pierre Elliott Trudeau meeting with Mao Zedong, the leader of China. And he went to China and he went to Russia. Pierre Elliott Trudeau Senior, the father of Justin Trudeau, he went to China and he met with the leader of China because they wanted to open up to China; they wanted a measure of detente. I also talked to you about Lloyd Axworthy during the landmines treaty here, and I talked to you about how that was an example of using diplomatic pressure—inviting countries.

The costs of diplomatic pressure can also be high. For example, if you pressure rather than go to war against Saddam Hussein, then maybe he would make bombs; maybe he would make biological bombs. Think about it in terms of the past and keep going.

So that diplomatic negotiation is another instrument, and this can be in two phases: pre-negotiation, when you are talking about what you're going to talk about at the table. So I put this picture here—he's phoning, he's talking about, "Hey, do you want to negotiate?" It's not a negotiation yet; it's trying to figure out the options. Pre-negotiation. And then when you finally get to the table. Here you are at the table; you try to identify the problem, and you search for negotiations and you engage in a rational decision-making process.

So can you think of cases of diplomatic negotiation? They might not be necessarily sitting at a table, but they are negotiating with each other. They are trading, they are negotiating land, they're negotiating rights. Think of some cases of diplomatic negotiation and put them in your mind. My list is different from yours, and I might be thinking about cases that I know about of negotiation, but yours—you might have different examples in your mind and you might think of different benefits. It might be personal or it might be domestic benefits, who knows.

And you need to think about the costs. So when you're advising someone, you're saying, "Okay, these are the benefits, but here are the costs." So you're presenting everything in terms of costs and benefits or in terms of merits and demerits. It's a successful way of thinking. People like it; it appeals to our rationality.

Legal instruments, including international law, are non-military instruments. And international law is a body of rules that governs the conduct of states, obviously. So the scope can be very extensive, and in human rights, international law is also applicable to individuals as well as states. This is all obvious.

Okay, so international law is obvious because it just seems obvious to us that Slobodan Milosevic, pictured here—he should be taken to court. And he was the head of Serbia at the U.N., the instigator, really, of the—of the Kosovo War and the ethnic cleansing that was carried on. So here he is in International Court where he actually died before he could be sentenced. Largely, arguably, Saddam Hussein should have also been brought to International Court—this is Saddam Hussein—but he was dragged through the streets and killed. He tried to escape. Maybe it would have been better to take him to International Court rather than kill him.

Okay, so can you think of some of the benefits of international law? Obviously, it's cheaper to bring people together at this sort of a banquet and get them to agree on—on an international law. That's a lot easier than going to war. However, it's not always successful. There will always be Saddam Husseins and Adolf Hitlers and Slobodan Milosevics in our mind, and adversaries. So what do we do there? The disadvantages of international law are legion, and many people are very wary of international law, particularly in the wake of Russia's attack on Ukraine. And there's a lot of worry that our international rules-based order is being threatened.

Now that we've framed all this, I want to introduce to you another instrument which is called CSBM. CSBMs: Confidence and Security Building Measures. But we always say CSBMs. And this is the idea of increasing openness and transparency. That's why I put a picture of Gorbachev, because he brought in the ideas of perestroika and glasnost. Glasnost means openness; perestroika means restructuring. But anyway, he is symptomatic of that idea, or symbolic of that idea, of increasing openness and transparency among states about their affairs—so, having more military exercises that we know about.

I like the idea of CSBMs. I want you to think of some cases where CSBMs were used. Here's a picture of Lord Robertson, who was NATO Secretary General, meeting with Vladimir Putin at NATO headquarters trying to negotiate. This was quite a long time ago—you can tell Putin's much younger—and it was a case where they were trying to build up confidence. Did it work?

Some of the benefits of CSBMs are that they are cheap in the short term. For example, the landmine treaty is in itself a confidence-building measure—confidence and security building measure—because it increases our confidence that the armies and militaries will not use anti-personnel mines, which are very hard to clear from a war zone. Here you can see they're trying to get rid of—such a dangerous job—get rid inch by inch of land mines. Such a problem.

So, we deal with benefits and then costs. The disadvantages of using CSBMs are that they're ignored. You can reach out to North Korea or to Saudi Arabia or to Iraq and spend a lot of money and energy, and you don't know if you can trust them. Now, I put this picture here of Kim Jong-un's father, Kim Jong-il. Um, could we have trusted him? Could we have reached out to him or not? It's notable that he was a real Hollywood film fan; he had 20,000 Hollywood films in his collection. I don't think he was rational. We couldn't have reached out to him in hindsight, could we have? And we didn't know that it was this son that was going to inherit; we thought it was another son. What about reaching out to Iraq? Could we have reached out? So these are some of the disadvantages. It's—it's hard to measure in hindsight whether these confidence and security building measures, CSBMs, are or were successful.