Welcome to lesson one on the instruments of Canada's foreign policy. We will learn about what’s called liberal or Pearsonian internationalism. This is the first lecture. It gives you an idea of the pacing, of the focus. You can see the captions do not correctly translate what I am saying. PowerPoint's captions are very poor, and it would take me too much time to fix the captions. Instead, we will use YouTube. I will export this to a YouTube channel and you can watch it in English or any language that you like. YouTube is responsible for the correct caption; I am not. What I say and what I show you on the PowerPoint is what will be tested, not the incorrect captions below. Let's launch into our first mainly historical lecture.

We're going to begin with the Golden Age of Canadian diplomacy. So we're going back to the 1940s and the 1950s, and the reason for that is because of the influence of Mike Pearson, or Lester Pearson—that was his official name, Mike Pearson—and he was the Under-Secretary of State for External Affairs. We used to call the Department of Foreign Affairs the Department of Global Affairs, and before that was the Department of External Affairs. So, I'm just mentioning that because he was the most senior diplomat for a very long time, and then he became the leader—the official leader of the opposition. So he headed the Liberal Party for many years, and then finally he was elected Prime Minister in 1963, right after the Cuban Missile Crisis, until 1968. So you can see he wrote three volumes of memoirs, which are all very interesting, and then you can see some pictures there of him, including a statue.

So the Golden Age is so important that that statue is featured in front of the Parliament in Ottawa. And there are so many Canadian diplomats that were hailed around the world. Of course, they were all men, but at that time men went to work in the 1940s and '50s, and women—there were no women diplomats, which is extremely interesting in hindsight. So who were the male diplomats that were so famous? There were many of them: Escott Reid, who wrote quite a few books later; John Holmes wrote many books; George Ignatieff—I'm going to show you a book; Norman Robertson was quiet but he was very senior; Arnold Heeney, whom I'll show you in a minute, a picture of; O.D. Skelton; Hume Wrong; and Basil Robinson, whom I had the honor of interviewing many years ago.

So here's a picture of Lester Pearson at the... on... wearing the bow tie, which he often wore. And then in the middle was the Secretary... uh, I'm sorry, what am I saying? Anthony Eden from the United Kingdom, and Dean Acheson on the right. So he was the Secretary of State for the United States. So this is a very senior meeting.

Here are some more pictures. You can see Lester Pearson laughing up at the top, back row. And you can see in the middle various people, including John Foster Dulles in the middle, C.D. Howe—very famous diplomats.

There is another picture. So you can see, you're getting the idea that Pearson enjoyed himself. He talked about baseball; he was a happy guy, everyone enjoyed being with him. There's Dwight Eisenhower, the President, and then the Prime Minister of Canada, Louis St. Laurent, before Diefenbaker.

Then one final picture here of Arnold Heeney, who was the Under-Secretary of State when he was just coming out there of Parliament in 1949 after the war. And Pearson, the Golden Age... and it led finally to, uh, Pearson at the United Nations getting the Nobel Peace Prize, which I'm going to talk to you about. He's... eye... again, in 1952, the President of the, um, Security Council, the rotating U.N. Security Council.

So why did the Golden Age end? There are a lot of reasons. There was, of course, the rise of the superpower rivalry and the beginning of the Cold War, but there was also the rise of other middle powers like Canada. So other countries like Brazil and India and Mexico came to the fore, and Canada fell down in comparison to them. We also had the Marshall Plan—maybe we'll have a Marshall Plan 2.0 for Ukraine? I've just written an article on that in the Hill Times, but it's the idea that we would re-impose the Marshall Plan and have one for Ukraine. So why did it succeed? Billions of dollars went into France and Germany and into the other smaller powers. There was also less reliance on international institutions like the UN, as there is today.

Who was famous? I mentioned some of them, but another famous diplomat was George Ignatieff, pictured here, who was very much into peace. His son Michael Ignatieff ran for Prime Minister. So George was fluently bilingual in Russian and in English. There's Pearson again, bow tie.

So what were the main accomplishments there? In hindsight, probably the establishment of NATO at that time with 12 members, and the imposition of the Canadian Article 2, which asked for economic and social collaboration and cooperation. So they really emphasized Article 2. John Foster Dulles did not want to insert it into the Washington Treaty, but in pressure by the Canadian diplomats, who were so good at what they did, brought that in. Now, in hindsight, it's Article 5, which I've talked to you about, that is so important. We also had, under... in the Golden Age, the establishment of U.N. peacekeeping forces. So I'm going to talk to you more about that—the Blue Helmets.

We need to return back to the Suez Crisis. And it seems people keep saying right now, "Oh, the Ukraine crisis and the Korea crisis..." Could we have a crisis... two crises? Could we have a Taiwan Straits crisis? So what they're referring back to is two crises way back in 1956. One was over the Suez Canal. The Suez Canal shapes and controls the flow of oil, so it shortens the export of oil from the Middle East to Europe and to the United States. The problem was that Egypt planned to build a huge dam called the Aswan Dam—it's now built—and the United States and the United Kingdom suddenly withdrew their financing of the dam. So this made the leader of Egypt very, very angry, and so he decided to nationalize the dam, which was too risky.

So here's the Suez Canal. You can see it is going between the Red Sea—where is my pen? Uh, here we are—and going into the Mediterranean Sea to get out to Europe. And this is a picture of it from... from the... from... not space, but fairly high.

The Suez Crisis happened at the same time as the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics—the former Russia, now the Russian Federation—invaded Hungary. And they invaded in 1956 with pretty well no notice, just like this invasion of Ukraine crisis. So it came as a complete surprise. You can see that President Eisenhower and the U.S. Secretary of State whom I just showed you, John Foster Dulles in the State Department, were taken by surprise. They decided... what to do? Well, they did not realize that the French and the Israelis and the United Kingdom were secretly meeting to discuss a detailed timetable, without telling their NATO allies of what they planned to do. They planned to invade.

So Israeli forces crossed the canal and they attacked Egypt on October 29, 1956. So this came as a complete surprise to everyone. There were negotiations at the U.N.; meanwhile, these great powers were negotiating or were secretly planning to attack Egypt. There's a picture of the canal again, and some pictures from the 1950s of the different coalitions and so on.

The U.S. officials and the Canadian officials recognized that the Israeli attack had a lot of implications. It wasn't just Israeli, but it was also United Kingdom and France. It could turn the Arab world against the West; it would aid the USSR in terms of propaganda; it would divide NATO; and it would undermine the United Nations. So they were very shocked that even though they were having these negotiations at the United Nations, the United Kingdom, France, and Israel had lied about their intentions.

What to do? Pearson... I put a picture of him thinking, thinking, thinking, thinking. He can see that there's four huge shifting things to remember here. First of all, cooperation among the United Kingdom and France—Canada's mother countries. So the United Kingdom and France were our mother countries then. And cooperation with the United States—our closest neighbor and a superpower—was threatened. So he's thinking about the shifting superpower and middle power alliances. And he's concerned, obviously; he's worried NATO can fall apart. He had tried to put NATO together. The United Nations, which he worked on for so long, was also being undermined and threatened by this. The Commonwealth, which Canada was a part of and continues to be a part of—the English-speaking world ruled at that time by the Queen, Queen Elizabeth—this could also be divided. And to add to it, add to the crisis, the USSR attack on Hungary was a problem.

So in 1956, it looked as if the West was going to simply allow the USSR to use force to settle disputes, just like today where the West has allied strongly against the Russian Federation, and even in Europe, despite gas shortages and despite problems, the West is allied. So Pearson was idealistic; he was what's called a Liberal Internationalist. And that's why Canadians are seen as different from Americans: because of our Liberal Internationalism. I'm going to explain this in more detail because you are the inheritors of that philosophy, which competes against the USSR idea of invasion and the Russian idea of invasion and the use of armed force.

Pearson's ideas were lauded. Pearson received the Nobel Peace Prize in 1958. Actually, I've got to correct that because... he... for his behavior in 1957, but he got it in 1958. And he helped establish the United Nations Emergency Force. The general who helped him was E.L.M. Burns—he was a Canadian general and he was in charge of UNEF 1. So there's Dag Hammarskjöld; he was killed later, he was a great poet as well. So there you can see Dag Hammarskjöld talking to Lester Pearson about what to do, and there's Pearson holding his Nobel Peace Prize medal.

The U.S. State Department was involved behind the scenes, and this is according to different accounts by Pearson and the U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations, Henry Cabot Lodge. Lodge had the draft from the United States State Department of the idea of a Pearson peace... of a peacekeeping force. And he realized that Pearson could possibly put it out on the U.N. General Assembly stage. So he had the draft, he saw Pearson, he said the U.S. would be very gratified if Canada would sponsor the resolution. Pearson speedily read it, quickly made up his mind, saw the hidden meanings and hooks, and he sponsored it in the U.N. General Assembly. So according to Henry Cabot Lodge, "I have never seen a man in a forum pick up and comprehend a complicated thing of far-reaching implications, and then get recognized and get the floor and propose it immediately." So here I ask you: Did he deserve the prize? Yes. He put in place an idea—it had been circulating for a long time since the 1940s—but he put in place an idea whose time had come.

And that's what we're going to be talking about today: the ideas that you have in your toolbox. Because you may get the opportunity at some point to put your idea in place—the idea you have in your toolbox. You may get the... you may get the Nobel Peace Prize. You might become Prime Minister. Imagine that.

So here you can see Lester Pearson with a Trudeau and a diplomat and a politician, greatly admired all around the world. There are more books—I mean, imagine, more books, so many books written on you.

Oh, let's talk about some other lessons that Pearson didn't really want to talk about as much, but these are lessons from the Vietnam War from the 1960s. Canada was involved in Indochina—that was the old name for Vietnam—way back since the 1950s and the Geneva Conference. But those international commissions just did not work. So Canadian opposition to the war began to rise in the 1960s. But in 1965, due to the U.S. bombing of the Vietcong—which was the group in Vietnam that was fighting—and the U.S. bombing of North Vietnam, which was terrible, Pearson's famous speech at that time is called his Temple University speech, and it departed from his usual policy of quiet diplomacy. You saw how he worked behind the scenes at the U.N. and at NATO and negotiated quietly. He was an advocate of quiet diplomacy.

So here's a picture, this famous picture of an absolute assassin killing, which was in the newspapers. And there's a movie... there's many movies you can watch on the Vietnam War. That's from a movie.

So Pearson's speech in the middle of the Vietnam War was quite surprising, actually. He did it in the President's own backyard, and he was very critical. He said that there should be a pause in the bombing in the interests of peace and negotiations and a ceasefire. So Canada's Ambassador to the United States, Charles Ritchie—who wrote many books later—was summoned to an angry meeting with the U.S. President, Lyndon Johnson, and an advisor who was also quite famous, McGeorge Bundy, at Camp David. There, the U.S. President bellowed at the Canadian Prime Minister. The Ambassador Charles Ritchie engaged in a spat, a fighting argument, and back at the cottage, Ritchie wrote that he saw Johnson grab Pearson by the shirt, which is quite offensive, really. I mean, can you imagine if Joe Biden... we can't even imagine this. But anyway, Ritchie phoned him and congratulated him and suggested, "Maybe what shall we do?" Pearson was calm, but Ritchie got the feeling he was quite shaken. I'm sure he was.

So what did he decide to do? He chose to defuse the matter with a conciliatory letter. So we're going to be talking in your toolbox about using letters to diplomats and to embassies, and we're going to talk about letters. But this is a classic letter here where Pearson wrote that his proposal had been because of Canada being a political democracy and so on. So it was conciliatory, peaceful.

That leads me to talk about the theoretical framework of Liberal Internationalism. So what are its main tenets? And its main diplomats are John Holmes and many of the people from the Golden Age. The first argument or first tenet is that Canada should act as a middle power. That means that we should try to negotiate for the superpowers; we should try to compromise on resolutions, be conciliatory; we should try to reduce tensions; and lobby. People around the world see Canada as an interlocutor because of our vast geography between the United States and Russia. They see us as being peaceful. We're always saying "sorry, sorry." Some people call this Humane Internationalism.

There you can see a book by John Holmes. I remember listening to him. He would talk out his speeches in the Canadian Institute for International Affairs, and I would just listen to him speaking out his books. It was amazing; these men could write really well. So there's some more books by J.L. Granatstein.

The idea that was important to Liberal Internationalism was functionalism. It conflicts in a way with the idea of Canada's middle power, because here it says that we can restrict membership in institutions to those who are interested. So, for example, on the Law of the Sea, we should have negotiations just among those countries that have a lot of sea. If we have a lot of resources on something, then those countries should negotiate. So you can see that conflicts with the concept of sovereign equality at the United Nations and equal representation, but functionalism was popular because people thought, "That's how we can avert great power hegemony; we will argue for functionalism." It does conflict with middle-powership, though.

The next important idea was that Canada should play a mediatory role. That means rather than being an apologist for the United States or being a puppet or a lackey, Canadians and diplomats should strive to obtain compromises and solutions to world problems. Which is why we're going to be doing our toolbox today; we're going to be trying to think about how we can mediate a gradual improvement in world order and bring about change through mediation and compromise. So there you can see those pictures I showed you before—Pearson laughing amongst all these men—but now in a new world that we're in, maybe you can think in your toolbox of new ways to promote compromise and to promote solutions.

Getting to your toolbox, which is so important: it's important to be what's called a participatory internationalist—a person who wants to strengthen world peace, that is active in accepting international responsibilities and contributing to international organizations. So that was also... that idea of internationalism was very popular during the Golden Age, but also still is a Liberal Internationalist concept.

The concept of collective security as opposed to, or versus, collective defense: so collective security is the idea of creating and maintaining organizations to preserve peace among the members. So it's the United Nations, NATO among the members. Collective defense is a pact among the members to defend against an outsider. So NATO is also a collective defense organization.

And finally, the concepts of flexibility twinned with quiet diplomacy. These are the ideas that we should be flexible; we should react; we should not use loud megaphone diplomacy. We should use behind-the-scenes techniques of persuasion. We should never criticize on another country's soil, like Pearson did during the Temple University speech. We should try to never publicly criticize countries and leaders; we should criticize behind the scenes.

So there's some final shots. You can see John English came to my class once many years ago and gave a lecture. He wrote a number of volumes on the Pearson years. If you could make these same guidelines that Pearson did, and you could play this kind of a role on the world stage, you can use these same concepts and ideas in new wording or the same wording, and you can forge out there in your own boat with the Canadian flag and you can try to change the world.

So these principles do have their roots in liberal ideology—small 'l', not the party Liberal, but the small 'l' liberal ideology. And it's a belief in equality and freedom and tolerance among individuals and among nations. It's this faith in humankind's power to solve our problems somehow through mediation and compromise, not through war and violence and armed conflict. It's a belief that we are progressing; that the world will become better; that humankind is not perfect now but will become perfect later and could gradually reform international institutions to become more peaceful. And finally, it's an appeal to human rationality and not to selfishness—to enlightened self-interest. That's what it appeals to, so as to obtain the harmony of interest instead of constant war.

Some final books—there are many, many books have been written by Canadians, and that's why worldwide, if you go to the United States and you speak to diplomats, they'll nod and look at you and think that you have inherited this kind of thinking pattern. Are these principles useful? Are they relevant anymore? Why or why not? And would you recommend some alternative guidelines? We'll keep thinking about that as we move through today's slides, because you're going to be making your own toolbox. Thanks for listening.

Welcome, students, to the final part—uh—the fourth part of Lesson One. This is on military instruments and non-military instruments. So we will review different types of techniques and instruments that governments, especially Canada, use.

The instruments of foreign policy are generally divided into military and non-military instruments. I'm going to divide them that way and also talk about the benefits of using the instruments, and then the potential costs of using the instruments. Rather than lecture to you at this point, I'd like you to somehow participate. And your instructions will happen as I speak, where I'd like you to think about some instruments and also their benefits and costs. So work your way through this. Although in the exam—it's a multiple choice exam—you won't be able to write your ideas; you won't be able to fill in blanks. But you are, I hope, planning to be either Foreign Service officers or maybe work in the field of Canadian government, and so take the opportunity to think this through because it will help to make you a better diplomat, I hope.

So, let's go ahead. I’ve put here a picture, and this is all the worldly goods of a person. This is a National Geographic picture, and this is everything that they own. But you own a computer; you actually have access to all the world's knowledge. Indeed, when we talk about this in class—if we were in class or in our group here, which we are—you in my class have more knowledge just among yourselves than all of the noblemen in Europe, everyone in the medieval time period. By far, you know way more. And so surely together, or just alone like this guy in the picture, you can figure out some military and non-military ideas.

Why are your ideas so important? Well, a country like Canada, we have diplomatic proposals, we have ideas. We use instruments not just from our past, but from the future. We think of ideas and we bring them to the bargaining table. Like I said, Canada is a member of more international organizations than any other country in the world.

It's time for us to begin with military instruments, which Canada tends not to use here. The most destructive, obviously, is total war—total Armageddon, the end of the world—and, as we talked about, midnight. This is the most destructive. But there can also be limited wars, so let's talk about those.

What I want you to do is go to Wikipedia or to go to any site and just look up examples of wars, lists of wars. Take a look at the United States; the number of—the United States has been involved in dozens and dozens of wars. Canada less so. And I want you to make your own list of limited wars, okay? Your list is going to be different from anybody else's. But here what we're looking at is—so that, let's say you are in the foreign policy service of, I don't know, some... Jamaica or China, or if you're working in Japan. I have no idea where you all are. Some of you are in—you are writing to me in a different time zone. Somebody just passed the midterm exam and arrived here from China. Congratulations; he did very well. I'm so pleased for him. But what I'm trying to say is I don't know where you all are, but you need to think about the benefits and the disadvantages of using limited war.

There are some advantages to limited war. I'm sure Vladimir Putin thought that there were advantages to going to war. Think of some advantages. Think of the costs of war. I know a lot about the cost of war because I look at SIPRI and I look at organizational assessments, and I'm very familiar with the costs. I tend to think less about the benefits, which is an—um—a problem.

Think about them, and then I want you to go on to think about alliances. So here, group it. I'm trying to teach you a way of thinking as well, where you are going to think in certain ways about instruments. So here we are at the point... Alliances are an instrument, like NATO, like NORAD. And then you can have permanent alliances like NATO and NORAD, or you can have temporary alliances like the Coalition of the Willing during the Gulf War, the Afghanistan Coalition during Afghanistan, and right now a temporary alliance against Ukraine—that's mainly the EU, Canada, and a lot of Western countries. Essentially 135 countries, a temporary alliance. So can you think of cases of temporary alliances? For example, if you're interested in the Middle East, are there any Saudi-led alliances? Are there any alliances in history under—uh—Hussein, pictured there? What about Queen Elizabeth and the Commonwealth?

Moving fairly quickly, you're getting the idea that you are making your own toolbox and you need to think. You can go back in history. You can go to the 1600s; you can go to the invasion of North America; you can talk about World War One, World War Two. It depends on you. But about the benefits and the costs of military alliances... Try to think about the benefits and the costs from the perspective of the leaders—the leadership that you will be advising.

Now you say to yourself, "I won't be advising anyone on military pressure." Pressure is used in all sorts of ways in all sorts of relationships. And it's the use of military power to intimidate in order to convince your adversary that it's not a good idea to take that particular action. So deterrence is one form of military pressure. It's not complicated. This involves convincing an adversary—your enemy or maybe your friend—that the costs of attack are guaranteed to be more than the cost of non-attack—non-attacking or not attacking. It's just telling someone that "if you try to attack me, the costs are going to be really high for you." Okay? So that's all you're doing: deterrence.

So what are the cases of military pressure? Here you need to go back in time. Let's say you want to go back to Louis XIV, like I have here. What are some of the causes? What are the cases of military pressure? Bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, these pictures... But you can prompt your mind by just going to Google Images and going through and looking at military pressure and the costs. And you can get distracted thinking about Queen Elizabeth's times and so on. The costs of nuclear weapons are... Books have been written on this. The costs for the world of—of—users.

Okay, I want to talk about non-military instruments because Canada is so good at this. We are incredibly good, as I lectured earlier, um, in terms of the golden age of Canadian diplomacy—in terms of using diplomatic pressure, either to approve or to disapprove. So I put a picture of George Bush here using diplomatic pressure, and the American diplomats are very good at this as well. Sometimes we say "the hand in the—the—fist in the—in the glove," or the "velvet glove" and things like that. But some of the commonly used methods are a formal letter of protest. I talked to you about that before: writing a letter, conciliatory as Pearson did, or not; withdrawing an ambassador; closing an embassy—closing our embassies in South Africa because of apartheid, closing our embassy in—in China, in Russia, cutting diplomatic relations completely. Extremely effective non-military instruments of foreign policy that you need to think about and know about. Say to your boss—let's say it's Napoleon Bonaparte here (I hope you would never have him as your boss)—but you need to give him examples of using diplomatic pressure. So he says, "Oh yeah, that's a good idea. I remember the Iraq War; Tony Blair, George Bush—they did that. Good idea."

So, I put here a picture of Yitzhak Rabin and Yasser Arafat shaking hands. Here they are actually in front of President Clinton, who brought them together at Camp David. They both got the Nobel Peace Prize for this. So think of historical cases. Hang on, think of unsuccessful cases of using diplomatic pressure. And here the one that always comes to mind is, of course, the United States' decision to invade Iraq because they thought that there were weapons of mass destruction hidden there and that Saddam Hussein would use them. Did they think that or not? We don't know. But there's Kofi Annan, the Secretary General of the United Nations, and George Bush deciding what to do. Unsuccessful case in hindsight.

Here we're thinking about the benefits and the advantages of using diplomatic pressure, which can be many. First, it's obviously less costly. Here we have a Pierre Elliott Trudeau meeting with Mao Zedong, the leader of China. And he went to China and he went to Russia. Pierre Elliott Trudeau Senior, the father of Justin Trudeau, he went to China and he met with the leader of China because they wanted to open up to China; they wanted a measure of detente. I also talked to you about Lloyd Axworthy during the landmines treaty here, and I talked to you about how that was an example of using diplomatic pressure—inviting countries.

The costs of diplomatic pressure can also be high. For example, if you pressure rather than go to war against Saddam Hussein, then maybe he would make bombs; maybe he would make biological bombs. Think about it in terms of the past and keep going.

So that diplomatic negotiation is another instrument, and this can be in two phases: pre-negotiation, when you are talking about what you're going to talk about at the table. So I put this picture here—he's phoning, he's talking about, "Hey, do you want to negotiate?" It's not a negotiation yet; it's trying to figure out the options. Pre-negotiation. And then when you finally get to the table. Here you are at the table; you try to identify the problem, and you search for negotiations and you engage in a rational decision-making process.

So can you think of cases of diplomatic negotiation? They might not be necessarily sitting at a table, but they are negotiating with each other. They are trading, they are negotiating land, they're negotiating rights. Think of some cases of diplomatic negotiation and put them in your mind. My list is different from yours, and I might be thinking about cases that I know about of negotiation, but yours—you might have different examples in your mind and you might think of different benefits. It might be personal or it might be domestic benefits, who knows.

And you need to think about the costs. So when you're advising someone, you're saying, "Okay, these are the benefits, but here are the costs." So you're presenting everything in terms of costs and benefits or in terms of merits and demerits. It's a successful way of thinking. People like it; it appeals to our rationality.

Legal instruments, including international law, are non-military instruments. And international law is a body of rules that governs the conduct of states, obviously. So the scope can be very extensive, and in human rights, international law is also applicable to individuals as well as states. This is all obvious.

Okay, so international law is obvious because it just seems obvious to us that Slobodan Milosevic, pictured here—he should be taken to court. And he was the head of Serbia at the U.N., the instigator, really, of the—of the Kosovo War and the ethnic cleansing that was carried on. So here he is in International Court where he actually died before he could be sentenced. Largely, arguably, Saddam Hussein should have also been brought to International Court—this is Saddam Hussein—but he was dragged through the streets and killed. He tried to escape. Maybe it would have been better to take him to International Court rather than kill him.

Okay, so can you think of some of the benefits of international law? Obviously, it's cheaper to bring people together at this sort of a banquet and get them to agree on—on an international law. That's a lot easier than going to war. However, it's not always successful. There will always be Saddam Husseins and Adolf Hitlers and Slobodan Milosevics in our mind, and adversaries. So what do we do there? The disadvantages of international law are legion, and many people are very wary of international law, particularly in the wake of Russia's attack on Ukraine. And there's a lot of worry that our international rules-based order is being threatened.

Now that we've framed all this, I want to introduce to you another instrument which is called CSBM. CSBMs: Confidence and Security Building Measures. But we always say CSBMs. And this is the idea of increasing openness and transparency. That's why I put a picture of Gorbachev, because he brought in the ideas of perestroika and glasnost. Glasnost means openness; perestroika means restructuring. But anyway, he is symptomatic of that idea, or symbolic of that idea, of increasing openness and transparency among states about their affairs—so, having more military exercises that we know about.

I like the idea of CSBMs. I want you to think of some cases where CSBMs were used. Here's a picture of Lord Robertson, who was NATO Secretary General, meeting with Vladimir Putin at NATO headquarters trying to negotiate. This was quite a long time ago—you can tell Putin's much younger—and it was a case where they were trying to build up confidence. Did it work?

Some of the benefits of CSBMs are that they are cheap in the short term. For example, the landmine treaty is in itself a confidence-building measure—confidence and security building measure—because it increases our confidence that the armies and militaries will not use anti-personnel mines, which are very hard to clear from a war zone. Here you can see they're trying to get rid of—such a dangerous job—get rid inch by inch of land mines. Such a problem.

So, we deal with benefits and then costs. The disadvantages of using CSBMs are that they're ignored. You can reach out to North Korea or to Saudi Arabia or to Iraq and spend a lot of money and energy, and you don't know if you can trust them. Now, I put this picture here of Kim Jong-un's father, Kim Jong-il. Um, could we have trusted him? Could we have reached out to him or not? It's notable that he was a real Hollywood film fan; he had 20,000 Hollywood films in his collection. I don't think he was rational. We couldn't have reached out to him in hindsight, could we have? And we didn't know that it was this son that was going to inherit; we thought it was another son. What about reaching out to Iraq? Could we have reached out? So these are some of the disadvantages. It's—it's hard to measure in hindsight whether these confidence and security building measures, CSBMs, are or were successful.
Welcome to a lecture on how to meet and greet at receptions. We're going to talk about how to make conversation during a reception, how to introduce yourself, how to introduce yourself at length, how to talk when you're at a diplomatic reception carrying a lot of things including your business card, how to follow up by email, and then also a little bit on how to ask for a letter of reference from a professor and which professors to ask.

I've put some sample questions here to help you. You will be very nervous when you meet an important person like Oprah Winfrey, President Obama, President Biden, or Prime Minister Trudeau (pictured here), and so I've memorized these questions and I urge you to memorize the following questions as well to use when you're in a circle—in a diplomatic circle—and people ask you to keep the conversation going. So you could ask an elder statesperson, "You know, what are the newspapers and magazines that you can't live without?" and they will read a lot every day and they'll tell you at length about it. Listen and listen and listen. People are... you could ask them what are their favorite books? That's a long answer, and it might be only if there's only one person there, but you could also ask them what writers influenced them? And if they're a lawyer or a Chief Executive Officer (CEO), you could ask them about a law that they created.

If you're in an international reception and you want to make conversation with people where English might not be their first language—it might be more difficult for them to understand what you're saying—then it is better to go back to easy questions. So I put some questions here that are kind of easier depending on who you're speaking to. "What are the sources of your best ideas?" Let's say you were talking with someone who could not speak English very well, then you can talk about a trend. Usually people will talk about AI. Don't talk about sports. Don't talk about the Blue Jays, because people only remember that you talked about sports. "What was the most important thing that they learned?" Not what you learned, because you always want to be listening to what they have learned, not what you have learned.

In terms of your brief introductions, I would like you to picture in your mind some typical scenes at a reception, and I want you to think about how you would hold your briefcase. Let's say you're carrying a purse, you're also carrying, let's say, a drink or... we used to practice in my in-person classes with teacups and spoons, and you also have to make conversation. You may be wearing uncomfortable clothing, you may be tired, you may be wearing high heels that are painful, and when everybody is looking at you, you need to look and think about what they are seeing. So I put some pictures here of Kamala Harris during the debate with President Trump. She was complimented for how she approached President Trump during the televised debate. She was wearing quite high heels, and she walked a stride toward him and put her hand out to his height and then she shook it. That was a very important point in the debate and it told us a lot. She must have been extremely nervous although she's spoken before, and that's why I urge you to remember the five W's. So just say to yourself in that kind of atmosphere: what, where, when, why? "What am I going to say?" Just say anything to yourself. If you are nervous, focus on a box like a computer or a window and practice breathing in, looking along one edge of the box, and breathing out, and breathing in and breathing out. So you go around the box trying to calm your mind. I'd like you to practice that if you can. If you have a lot of anxiety, remember that people will not see that your legs are shaking, they will not see that you are perspiring, they will not notice if your hands are actually trembling. You might think that they're seeing all that, that they're hearing that your voice is shaking, but actually they're just focusing on you and your body language and what you're saying.

I put a picture here of a reception. So what you need to think about is what are you going to say? And where do you work, let's say, or when have you been working, and why are you working on something? Nobody will be shaking; no one will worry at all if you're shaking in your boots. Most of the time in this... this is at the United Nations, I believe. Yeah, people are wearing ties... no, this is not the United Nations, but anyway, I had another picture of the UN. Often you have to look down at their chest to see who they are. You can't go over and flip the... you can't flip their placard to see who they are, but you can ask them, "Oh, can I see that more closely?" and they'll lift it up and show it to you.

Practice your introductions of yourself in front of a mirror. Look up when you answer the phone. So when you answer the phone, look up and say your name and what you're doing, and it will make your voice sound more friendly and positive. Pretend to exchange a business card in the mirror with both hands, trying to look friendly. Where are you going to put their business card? Are you going to put it in your pocket or in your purse?

Exchanging business cards: I suggest that you develop a business card now that has a permanent address—your home, a permanent address, not a temporary address that changes all the time. I suggest that you carry them with you always in your purse and that you practice exchanging them with other people. So we used to practice in my class, for example, if you're exchanging them with Asian people, how would you bow? And you present it. Often they will look at the whole business card in front of you, examining it very closely. Do you want to put your cell phone number on your business card? I have three business cards. Only one has my cell phone number on it because I want to... and then one has my business card, and so on. So think about whether you need more than one business card. I actually have a false business card, one that has a false cell phone number on it just so that I can give it to people who I really don't want to because they'll often ask, "Well, can I have your cell phone number?" "Well, here it is. No, thank you."

Okay, is the North American introductory gesture—the basic handshake—dead? Well, as we... it doesn't... Oh, my face is there, and that's why we're not using my face in future. You'll see I don't use it anymore because I need every little bit of space here. But experts estimate that 80 to 90% of communication is nonverbal; it's body language. So it's how you portray yourself that people remember and that has the most information for them. So what about your handshake? What about the basic handshake? It is definitely not dead. And in my classes we used to practice in person to shake hands and give each other feedback. What I'd like you to do this week is to give your family and friends feedback and ask them to give you feedback about your handshake. So reach forward with your right hand and aim for the triangle in their hand, which is right here. Aim for that triangle and press against it. People will actually think that they trust you because they can feel you pressing with that triangle against their hand.

Don't do a fishy handshake. What's a fishy handshake? That's when you have a very weak handshake like that. It's just so weak it tells people... a lot of women will deliberately have a very weak handshake and that is something that you need to train yourself not to do, if I can give you some advice. So the basic handshake: you squeeze their handshake, you don't just put your fingers in there like a dead fish, and you go up and down and then you release. You do not continue to do that, which is sort of domineering as well. Some people do a kind of a basic bow, which you see the Governor General Payette doing here with the First Nations person. So practice what you're going to do and then use your fingers, as Given says here, as sort of antennae to pick up how long you're going to keep shaking hands with the people.

Now, I have very cold hands, so I often will go before a reception and I will jump up and down in the bathroom trying to make my hands warm, because if people shake my hands, you can see this look of horror across their face because they think she's like a cold, cold maiden, ice maiden. And so sometimes I'll say—if I still have very cold hands, you know, I can see their face—"Cold hands, warm heart!" Because you don't want... and also if you have what's called a death grip, try to loosen it.

Okay, after the pandemic, we were seeing more different, creative types of handshakes: the elbow or the fist bump where you just are doing that. So there's Boris Johnson doing the... looks like the elbow and the fist bump. You can also politely say... you can completely bow. So if, let's say, you're here in an airport or in a terminal and you and you're not really sure that you want to start shaking hands, there's nothing wrong with just stepping back a bit. And you'll notice that a lot of Muslim women will not shake hands with a man; they'll put their hand like this and they'll bow slightly with their hand over their heart. So here you can see King Charles, whom you would always address as King Charles, and Queen Camilla, his consort, bowing. They have to shake hands a lot. Practice with your friends this week if you can. Here's John Kennedy shaking hands with the young Bill Clinton. Obviously he... there he is pushing down a little bit, and then behind my face, which is such a nuisance and believe me we will not be using my face in future, you can see Bill Clinton and his wife Hillary Clinton and also Donald Trump when they were younger. You can always decline the basic handshake if you don't feel like shaking hands with someone. You can wave or you can smile. You do not need to actually shake hands.

The two-handed shake, let me go over that just quickly. This is where you shake their hand and then you put your hand on top a little bit so as to be more friendly, and this is showing emotion. It could be that you... here's President Trump, and I have another picture here, I think he's good at doing it, but I suggest that you use it sparingly. He's an older man with a great deal of power. So here he is with Prime Minister Abe from Japan and he held on to his hand for 19 minutes, shaking it up and down, holding on to it. This is the end of the 19 minutes. So you can do that and a lot of communication is happening there about power and friendship.

Here's President Trump also with... this is when he was running against Hillary Clinton and you can see there the basic handshake with the shake and grab. Now this I advise you not to use it in a professional setting. It can be used to show who the dominant person is if you push down, or if it's an underling, if you shake hands and you push down in an elevator pushing down—so that tells a lot. The "pat it down" among women, this is often where you put your hand forward and you're not quite giving them a hug but you're patting them on the shoulder. Now men will do that a lot, and Given believes men are more comfortable about receiving this than are women. But actually, to tell the truth, I always wear shoulder pads in business meetings and people always are grabbing me by the shoulder and so on; so I never go to a business reception without wearing a business suit. But I'm an older woman, so that's what happens.

Okay, let's keep going. The hip hop hug or pound hug, I'm not recommending that, so you can see there don't use this anymore. It should be saved for your friends. Okay, so this is a quick man-to-man greeting and it really has no place in a business setting, but I wanted to put it in there because a lot of you are Generation X and Y and now we have the new generation, Beta, coming this year, and they will be doing different types of handshakes for sure.

Moving on here, kissing. Now this is difficult because a lot of times if you're in Europe or if you're in Russia, this is definitely a type among diplomats who you know. They will grab you and start doing what's called air kissing. They're not actually kissing you; they're kissing past your shoulder into the air. It's hard to explain and sometimes they'll do it three times, sometimes they'll do it twice, so you have to remember they might be going to go again for the third time. You can practice it before traveling. It is not done a lot here in North America.

Okay, how to follow up if you meet someone. The first thing that I recommend... this is just an email I grabbed out of an email from today actually, and here I can tell immediately that the student might be using artificial intelligence, chat, to write the email because it says, "I hope this email finds you well," and it's written in Aptos 11-point font. So that tells me. But on the other hand, there are some mistakes: there's no period after "Dr." and there's a sentence fragment here—it doesn't make any sense. There's a strange use of the word "learnings," and they want to pursue graduate studies based on their performance in three second-year classes. Not a good idea because these are online courses, and as I've said over and over again, I do not do reference letters unless you absolutely have taken four of my courses and so I know you very, very well from the fourth course and you absolutely need my reference. But in this case, I have to say no, because they're trying to do graduate studies and the questions asked are about integrity, questions are asked about how I've seen you perform in a live setting. Do you have good oral presentation skills, sincerity, integrity? On and on. They have many, many questions, so I would have to say no. "Warm regards" is also a typical ChatGPT signature.

Now when you're addressing people in a reception or at the university campus, you need to remember what their rank is. And there are ranks everywhere, like in the military: colonels and lieutenant colonels, generals, brigadier generals—it goes on and on. You need to kind of study that. You can tell a lot by their insignia on their shoulders and their medals. But for professors, it's really actually quite hard. Actually, age is the best indicator; if they're older then they might be a retired professor. Don't say to them, "Oh, are you retired yet?" People keep saying to me, "Aren't you retired yet?" Extremely insulting! Don't say that. Don't say that. This professor said that to me the other day in the elevator. I was like, please! That's like saying, "Are you pregnant?" and then they're not pregnant. I'm not retired quite yet, people!

Okay, what's a full professor? A full professor can be a distinguished professor and they are distinguished because of their research, their teaching, and their service. And they are very high up; their salaries are very high up and they generally are about 50 to 70 years old. Associate professors are tenured; they have job security, they work full-time, and they can't be fired except if they do something very, very terrible. So I'm an associate professor, so I'm tenured and I work full-time on research, teaching, and administration, graduate supervision, and so on. So I have a lot of responsibilities, not just teaching. Assistant professors may just have teaching responsibilities; they may be tenure-track, they don't have tenure yet (because otherwise they'd be an associate professor), and they may often be on a temporary contract. They do have to have a doctorate; they have to have a PhD that is completely defended. Now, a doctor has a PhD that is defended and they have officially graduated with what's called a doctorate or a Doctor of Philosophy—actually PhD—there are different doctorates in education (I don't want to explain those, those are different). But a professor without a doctorate could be a high school teacher. So you could refer to a Fanshawe College or a high school teacher or college teacher as a professor even if they don't have their doctorate. It's getting a little confusing that way because then you think, "Are they a full professor?" They could be very old, so that reference letter is not as valuable on stationery as that done by the Professor Emeritus or the full professor, for sure.

And so you have to be very careful when you ask for references to make sure you're asking for references from professors who are tenured associate or full professors. Preferably the older they are, the more senior they are, the better for you for your reference letters. Now, a TA—should you ask a TA? No, not at all for a reference letter. A TA doesn't have even an MA often; so an MA is a Master of Arts. A TA doesn't have an MA and so that reference letter is certainly not as valuable. What about a BA Honors? That's a person who has a specialty, a four-year specialty in one field, so they've taken a lot of... and now finally the BA, the double major, much more popular now at Western, but it does close you off from professional programs like a further degree, an MA in your chosen field. But sometimes it can open it up; it really depends.

Okay, there's a lot of confusion, there's no rigorous rules. But let me add that if someone says ABD, that means "All But Dissertation." It means they've done the coursework for their PhD but they have not done their dissertation, and so it's just ABD. It doesn't really mean anything; in fact, you really shouldn't use it on your signature.

What about if you use on your signature "Ambassador" or "former Ambassador"? When I meet ambassadors, I always call them Ambassador even if they're retired. That's the important thing that you can do. And you'll see in our class we'll have a lot of retired ambassadors and you'll hear me continually refer to them as Ambassador. And they are required to say, "No, I've retired," but then you can continue to address them, just like a Member of Parliament: you would continue to address them as "The Honorable Member of Parliament." What about... so a former ambassador I'm covering here, you should continue to address them as Ambassador. I'm not going to cover LLM degrees here, that's a lot of different things, but let me mention that some people have many, many letters after their name. The person who I saw who had the most was Kelly Leitch, who wrote to me once—she had 17 letters. So in addition to "Doctor," she had just so many. I just looked her up on Wikipedia... there she is... and then she's got more letters... so not on Wikipedia now but she did before. So I put here some people who are calling themselves ambassadors, but they may not be ambassadors in the strictest sense.

Okay, let's talk now about emails. You can look at different people's emails. There are companies that will give you graphics and so on; you can use the Western graphic, I'll show you in a moment. I put some sample ones here. The phone number is always useful and as well you can translate it into whatever language you want if you want and add your Twitter, your web, your Instagram, your LinkedIn, your BeS, whatever you want to add, your websites and so on. You can add a contact if you are wanting people to know who to contact instead of you, and you can add... you know what I'm getting at here.

Finally, let me suggest that in the next few days while you're in the class, while we're getting ready, that you take some time to think about your email signature and write some different signatures. So you can see I have ones here for my family... say no, I use Aptos Body because I'm often using chat to fix my letters at the end. So I use Aptos Body 11 and then in my signature 10, but my confidentiality notice, my Land Acknowledgement goes on... I have one of the longer signatures that I've seen, but that's okay because it saves a lot of time and people can always find me. The media can always reach me on my phone, my cell, on everything—you can always reach me.

Okay, so that's me, but I want you to figure out your signature. Okay, thanks for that. Took us exactly 21 minutes. A bit long, one minute too long, but thank you. I probably should have stopped teaching you so much about the fish—the fish handshake. Don't do that, ladies, please don't do that. And men and women and non-binary people and everyone, just develop your handshakes so that you're confident and you smile, and that should get you a long way in the world.

Welcome students to the second part of Lesson 1. There's always four lessons, and this is part two of Lesson 1, which is on the instruments of foreign policy: directed and diluted multilateralism.

So, I fast-forward from Lester Pearson, who was called Mike Pearson, to Jean Chrétien, who was another Liberal Prime Minister of Canada. We will talk about Conservative Prime Ministers like Brian Mulroney in future weeks as we tackle different problems, but here I need to talk to you now about Jean Chrétien's form of liberal internationalism and also their focus on directed and diluted multilateralism. You can see the captions are not very good with PowerPoint; you need to use the YouTube channel in order to create excellent captions, and it's your responsibility to create those captions and study them, especially if English is your second language. Welcome to our class; this is part two.

The historical background here is of the Jean Chrétien period, which is quite long if you look at it: 1993 to 1995, then another five years, and then another four years. You can see that picture there of Jean Chrétien, Kim Campbell, Joe Clark, and Pierre Elliott Trudeau. Your professor has met all of these people, including Jeffrey Pearson, Lester B. Pearson's son, who I was very good friends with. The only person I never had the honor of meeting, except from very far away, was Pierre Elliott Trudeau. I saw him in Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, at a university talk, and all the students threw tomatoes at him—rotten tomatoes—because of the cruise missile testing. We wore black armbands to signify how opposed we were to the cruise missile testing.

Anyway, these people, all of them, are actually symbolic of the multilateralist perspective in Canadian foreign policy. We're going to learn about that. It evolved in many ways from liberal internationalism, so we need to learn about the main tenets of this before we do our own toolbox. Can we characterize that Chrétien time period? Well, let's talk about that. Maybe it is directed multilateralism, the Team Canada approach. Let's explore that more.

Well, I have to introduce now a lot of new issues because we're moving from the 1940s and to the '60s all the way up to the 1990s where the Chrétien government—remember Chrétien had been a cabinet minister under Lester B. Pearson and he was very interested in the Arctic—so this is the beginning of Canada looking northwards and starting to realize that we have a huge amount of Arctic under our sovereignty. This was when they had a new Arctic Ambassador. I remember Mary Simon was nominated; one of my professors, Franklyn Griffiths, had hoped he'd become the Arctic Ambassador, but instead it went to a woman, Mary Simon. Who is she now? She's the Governor General of Canada, the highest-ranking person below King Charles and Queen Elizabeth. 

So, there's the Arctic. There were many, many new concepts that came into play, and you need to know these if you want to operate in the international sphere. Chrétien was very against being in what he called the "camp follower" relationship. He didn't want, like President Reagan and Brian Mulroney pictured there, Canada to be in that sort of subservient position. He wanted it to be more a partnership between equals. He wanted to be a cooperative partner, and he was, as I've mentioned before, good friends with Bill Clinton.

Some other concepts that I want to bring up for you to remember are this idea of subsidies. Canadians started talking about the subsidies that were being put in place by the Americans, and they started criticizing us, especially because of our logging and our subsidization of our forestry and "dumping" our forest products into the United States. So they wanted, and so did we, more codification of our relationship—more international law. That led to these ideas about NAFTA. Now, we had the Free Trade Agreement under Brian Mulroney, but NAFTA, the North American Free Trade Agreement, came into play now, and this tried to stop US trade harassment. It was not an insignificant agreement; it was trying to stop the American domination of our trading.

Some other ideas were that Canada wanted to control our oil and our energy, especially in the North and in western Canada. They wanted to make sure that Canada's oil and Canada's energy, and our huge gas resources and so on, were treated fairly in North America under the Chrétien government. There was also a lot of attention paid to services, especially Canada's banks. We have seven strong banks—Toronto-Dominion, Royal Bank, and so on—and they were becoming less competitive against the many, many American banks. Now they are very, very strong because of this initiative, and we should be thankful for that. So there's the picture of Jean Chrétien and Bill Clinton talking about how they are trading and leveraging and linking.

At the same time, the Global South, which I've symbolized here by this picture, was suffering. The new ideas we're going to get into are dispute resolution mechanisms—this is a kind of trendy word for saying, "Let's settle our conflicts with mechanisms." They talked a lot about energy protection. They wanted a level playing field with agreed-upon labor and environmental standards. That's when we started talking about expansion of the United Nations Security Council; it's expanded. We started talking about opposing the EH101 helicopters because they were too sophisticated. Canada wanted to review NORAD again, usually every five years, sometimes every three years. This was the beginning of the notion of converting bases that were too large and too costly for the Department of National Defence into, for example, peacekeeping training centers. This was the idea of democratizing foreign policy. I bring this up; it goes past you now, and maybe later when you are traveling the world on behalf of Canada, you will think of these ideas and they will compete with the kind of concepts that you see here.

This is a former Eastern European city. Look at it—I mean, people are just in these apartments living dreadful lives. No parks, no freedom; it's very difficult. Canada has a lot of new concepts. It's very attractive for immigrants; people want to come to Canada. We have the idea that people should come here because we're just and we're generous, versus a "business class" approach where you buy your way in. So these are ideas I'll talk about more when we talk about immigration and refugee policy.

The concept of sustainable development came into being at this point, and this integrated many different ideas—now 17 SDG goals—but at that time, we started talking about environmental and economic and social goals: how to make it a fair world for everyone with sustainable consumption seven generations into the future, making sure that global trade patterns from the North to the South and vice versa were fair, using appropriate technology that was solar or wind-powered, and using our resources to meet global human needs. You can see how that pattern comes right out of me because it's just natural; it's part of our way of thinking in Canada, and that's what I'm trying to teach you here: how this has evolved.

The newer concepts and issues from the 1990s also included "Greening the Rio Summit." So, what does this mean? This was the first UN summit that focused on the environment. The reason it was important was because of the guy in charge, Maurice Strong. Strong had the biggest network in the world. I saw that his address book was like a binder. He helped to craft the Agenda 21 agreement. He knew everyone everywhere. That was when they started talking about the target of 0.7% of GNP for international aid. This was an idea that came about by Pearson and the "Three Wise Men," but this is when they started actually thinking about putting it in place—"Greening GATT" and guarantees of environmental standards, ratifying the Law of the Sea (it still has not been ratified, but we still talk about it), and developing new indicators of sustainable development. Sustainability was very, very important.

Here are some pictures of Central America at the time. So, while Canada in the 1990s was developing these new ideas, in Central America we had the wars: Guatemala, Nicaragua, Panama. The environment was being destroyed; people here, you can see drug use, going through the garbage for food, and so on. Extremely distressing situations, and people wanted to help. They really wanted to help people outside of our borders, which is what we should do. 

That's when we started talking more about North-South relations instead of saying, "Oh, they're underdeveloped," or "They're less developed," or using that concept of development as if we're so developed. That's wrong. Instead, the idea was to use the concept of the "North" where people do have, it seems, a higher GNP. Now, of course, you say right away, "Well, Australia and New Zealand, they have a high income per capita, they're not in the North," but this was a general kind of concept that was popular in the 1990s. The South has a lower GNP, has a lower per capita income, maybe it's in the South. 

So the idea then was that Official Development Assistance, which we call ODA, would rise to 0.7% of GNP by the year 2000. We would also redirect CIDA's aid—CIDA is the international agency for Canada that deals with our aid—from Eastern Europe to the Third World. So instead of spending money on Ukraine and on Poland, it would go to Africa and to Asia and to South America. I'm dwelling on North-South relations because if you are interested in righting international injustice and in working in development (it's still called development), then you need to know some of these phrases if you want to work internationally, if you want to work for an NGO.

I mentioned before that this is an old picture, an old chart, and you can see that the amount of ODA as a percentage of Gross National Product for Canada kept slipping from the target. Instead of getting up to 0.7%, it kept going down and down and down. More modern is Canada's percentage compared to other countries. So you can see that Canada spends approximately 0.29% right now—it's 0.27%—but these are small amounts that are different. Look at the Danes, how much they're spending: nearly 1%. And then the Norwegians are higher than 0.7%. The US is low.

Okay, so take a look at that. There were many important reports. This was a time when we just did endless reports; everyone did reports, participated, consulted, and so on. There were Red Books, there were White Books, there were all sorts of books—colored books, Black Books, and so on. There were reports of special joint committees and bipartisan committees, reviewing committees, and Canadian foreign policy committees. I sound bored, but it was actually an interesting time because they were consulting civil society, including academics, and it was a time when we were thinking about culture. Was that a way that we could penetrate other countries like France? Who was important to Canadian culture? Know that in the 1990s, my students could name easily every single one of these people without even pausing. They knew who they all were; they were all important and significant Canadian cultural icons.

I want to mention this report because this is the idea of common security: that what I do to increase my security may decrease my adversary's security, and we need to think about common security. As a concept, it was very popular in the 1990s, and we gradually also started to think about using common security principles to assert sovereignty over Canada's territory. Why militarize the Arctic? Why decrease Russia's security and the United States' when we could be more peaceful? One of my thesis supervisors, Janice Stein, pictured here, and Maurice Archdeacon conducted this National Forum, and they solicited ideas at the time which were moved to indexes.

I bring this up because in the early 1990s and the mid-1990s, there was no internet, there were no emails. Everything was phone calls and letters and written. Imagine! Of course, I had my own consulting company, and I bring this up as a case study. Why? Because I learned a lot about negotiating and about proposals. My consulting agency was called Common Security Consultants, and we put together a proposal for a peacekeeping training center. We worked with John Savage and Alexa McDonough, Brian Mulroney, Kim Campbell, Jean Chrétien, and we tried to get everyone to cooperate on the idea. We were very successful, actually, in hindsight. 

That was our proposal—look, I even drew the red Canadian flag, can you imagine? But I asked Jeffrey Pearson if we could call it—at this point we needed a name—so I asked if we could call it the Pearson Peacekeeping Training Centre, and he said yes. This was an article by Gwynne Dyer; I remember I was thrilled for him to write anything on what we had done, and he's still writing his columns.

I reflect on this because of the lessons learned. They finally put together a privatized—it was privatized—it was called the Lester B. Pearson Canadian International Peacekeeping Training Centre. You could register there and so on. I don't know, I have mixed feelings about it. What I wanted—and it leads me to conclude almost seven years of work—is by saying that ideas can go through four phases. First, they're ignored. We were completely ignored. Then we were ridiculed—I was ridiculed. And then the idea was accepted as obvious: "We should do that." And then it was copied. There are peacekeeping training centers all around the world now, although the Canadian one has been closed.

Let me go on to the mid-1990s, where this was very important: budgets are much more important than you can imagine, and you will learn that the budget has the big impact on your toolbox. Paul Martin was the Finance Minister under Jean Chrétien; you can see them here, Paul Martin presenting his budget. And this was a cut, cut, cut budget. He cut DFAIT, the Department of Foreign Affairs and International Trade; CIDA; he transferred, he sold property; he reduced the Department of National Defence; he contracted out. But in hindsight, this cutback at the government level helped when we hit the 2008 recession, but it also helped in many ways to cut government spending. So we have to be respectful in hindsight that he made some harsh decisions, and as a result, Canada became wealthier. There was going to be less contracting out (my Common Security Consultants), less money bumping, and so this impact of this budget and the growing debt led to a final report I want to mention called the "Government of Canada toward a Rapid Reaction Capability for the UN" report. 

This was an expensive study on the 50th anniversary of the United Nations. I remember we stayed in Montebello, a very expensive hotel made out of wood outside of Montreal, and we discussed for days whether there might be a UN rapid reaction capability. I was involved because I had worked on the Pearson Peacekeeping Training Centre and had written a lot on peacekeeping training. So at that time, the government wanted Vanguard Forces, joint planning, and training. We rejected the idea of a volunteer UN force; it would be one with a combination of volunteers and professional soldiers. The main problem was that the proposal was rejected by the United States behind the scenes, and the UN just didn't have the money without the US endorsing it.

So this leads me to a small success during the 1990s. The Pearson Centre failed, and so did the rapid reaction capability idea. It failed. The landmines concept, which was a more minor concept, actually became very, very successful. So let's look at that. The Landmines Treaty was proposed in 1997, and some people will call it the "Ottawa Process" because some of the meetings were in Ottawa, Canada's capital. This was a very successful coalition between the anti-landmine coalition of NGOs—civil society NGOs—and those that were in government. Canada really called for a unilateral ban. This is interesting because we didn't hope for a negotiated multilateral ban; we just said we're going to have a unilateral ban among the countries that export them, and there won't be the further manufacture of anti-personnel landmines. 

I put a picture of a landmine there. They're very small; sometimes they look like airplanes or drones. They can be plastic or they can be metal. They're not huge landmines like anti-tank landmines, but the idea was to ban them because they killed and maimed civilians. Canada obtained a moratorium; no more of them were allowed to be produced among the signatory countries—on the production, the export, and the use of anti-personnel landmines. My friend Earl worked very hard on this, a diplomat, and then he moved into cluster mines and he was able to get that to be banned as well. 

So the Landmines Treaty was a landmark among diplomats, civil society, and NGOs. The Minister of Foreign Affairs pictured there, Lloyd Axworthy, with Jean Chrétien applauding behind him and Kofi Annan, the UN Secretary-General. So that's Lloyd Axworthy. They were very pleased with this, which was a unilateral move. Keep that in mind when you're thinking of your examples of unilateral measures that have few costs. This was just a couple of conferences—one in Oslo and one in Ottawa—and the countries came back. Sure, the United States and Russia and the big powers and South Korea did not sign the treaty, but Japan and many middle powers did. So now it's what's called an "informal regime." It's an informal regime where countries informally and formally agree not to manufacture anti-personnel landmines.

This leads me to talk about the International Criminal Court, which has to interest you if you want to go into Law, by the way. Take a look under my "Coffee Break" slides—I think I called it "I Need a Break" slides—and there is a PowerPoint production on how to get into law school if you want to get into law school. One of my first students helped to set up the International Criminal Court. She actually worked for Ambassador Kirsch on setting up the International Criminal Court. It started with this first idea of an International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia—see how you build up your ideas? Then they did one for Rwanda. Of course, they got criticized for doing one for Rwanda and not for doing one for Nicaragua or for a US hegemonic-based area. 

The principal prosecutor was a Canadian, and her name is Madame Justice Louise Arbour. If you ever want to look at a CV that is extremely impressive by a lawyer, you take a look at her and follow in her footsteps. Learn and do what she did, because you could also become incredibly important and powerful. So the International Criminal Court was formally established after 60 countries ratified the Rome Statute of the ICC. Sixty countries, but it is extremely important, and that led to Canada being seen as more important. We were working on peacekeeping, we were working on development aid, and then we were voted on and we became a member of the UN Security Council in 1999. I remember the Ambassador who was in charge, Robert Fowler; he had worked on the peacekeeping training center, and so he was allowed to chair just like Pearson had chaired the UN Security Council. So we served for a two-year term on that until the end of December 2000, and among our many responsibilities was to do sanctions against Angola. We actually didn't do a lot—we didn't do a lot—but still, it gave us an insight into what was happening internationally.

Let's think about a conceptual framework that actually describes the Chrétien government's foreign policymaking style. A simple idea is the concept of multilateralism. This is the practice of coordinating national policies in groups of three or more states. So it's not two and it's not one; it's three or more, and these can be ad hoc or they can be by means of institutions. That's the simple concept of multilateralism. 

I want to now talk about multilateralism a bit more because Canada has its own kind of version of multilateralism, which is used to describe the Chrétien government's foreign policymaking style. This is where a country works in solidarity with coalitions of states like the Commonwealth or NATO, coalitions of associations like La Francophonie, and international institutions like the United Nations and NATO, to achieve Canadian foreign policy objectives. So Canada, under the Chrétien government, was a member of more international organizations than any country in the world. We were a member of everything! And this kind of friendliness was very popular; it described the Chrétien government style.

I want to bring up another concept, which was called "directed multilateralism." This was where we argued that we should direct our foreign policy to the institutions like NATO that are best suited to Canadian requirements—NORAD and NAFTA. We should give priority to those institutions. So you see how they're starting to dilute it, and it is interesting: when you dilute it, it means you have to leave people and institutions by the wayside that you're not going to pay as much attention to.

I'm going to end with the Team Canada approach because, in the end, Jean Chrétien was a big player of hockey—he really likes hockey—and so this concept was used to describe what he did because he took Team Canada to China three times. This is a coalition of leaders from the provinces—the Premiers and the Federal government, including Quebec—and the private sector. So they tried to encourage more and more interaction with China. Team Canada approach: should we have that again with China? I'm starting to ask you these questions because at the time when Jean Chrétien was Prime Minister, Canada did really reach out to many, many countries. We didn't try to dilute our multilateralism; we didn't say, "Oh well, we're not going to be friends with the Chinese, we're not going to be friends with the Russians, we're going to keep our friends and allies to a small group." No, no. The approach was very much, "Let's try to approach South Korea, let's go to Japan, let's try to visit with everyone that we can." And so Jean Chrétien was an interesting Prime Minister in hindsight. Thank you for listening.
