Welcome students to the second part of Lesson 1. There's always four lessons, and this is part two of Lesson 1, which is on the instruments of foreign policy: directed and diluted multilateralism.

So, I fast-forward from Lester Pearson, who was called Mike Pearson, to Jean Chrétien, who was another Liberal Prime Minister of Canada. We will talk about Conservative Prime Ministers like Brian Mulroney in future weeks as we tackle different problems, but here I need to talk to you now about Jean Chrétien's form of liberal internationalism and also their focus on directed and diluted multilateralism. You can see the captions are not very good with PowerPoint; you need to use the YouTube channel in order to create excellent captions, and it's your responsibility to create those captions and study them, especially if English is your second language. Welcome to our class; this is part two.

The historical background here is of the Jean Chrétien period, which is quite long if you look at it: 1993 to 1995, then another five years, and then another four years. You can see that picture there of Jean Chrétien, Kim Campbell, Joe Clark, and Pierre Elliott Trudeau. Your professor has met all of these people, including Jeffrey Pearson, Lester B. Pearson's son, who I was very good friends with. The only person I never had the honor of meeting, except from very far away, was Pierre Elliott Trudeau. I saw him in Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, at a university talk, and all the students threw tomatoes at him—rotten tomatoes—because of the cruise missile testing. We wore black armbands to signify how opposed we were to the cruise missile testing.

Anyway, these people, all of them, are actually symbolic of the multilateralist perspective in Canadian foreign policy. We're going to learn about that. It evolved in many ways from liberal internationalism, so we need to learn about the main tenets of this before we do our own toolbox. Can we characterize that Chrétien time period? Well, let's talk about that. Maybe it is directed multilateralism, the Team Canada approach. Let's explore that more.

Well, I have to introduce now a lot of new issues because we're moving from the 1940s and to the '60s all the way up to the 1990s where the Chrétien government—remember Chrétien had been a cabinet minister under Lester B. Pearson and he was very interested in the Arctic—so this is the beginning of Canada looking northwards and starting to realize that we have a huge amount of Arctic under our sovereignty. This was when they had a new Arctic Ambassador. I remember Mary Simon was nominated; one of my professors, Franklyn Griffiths, had hoped he'd become the Arctic Ambassador, but instead it went to a woman, Mary Simon. Who is she now? She's the Governor General of Canada, the highest-ranking person below King Charles and Queen Elizabeth. 

So, there's the Arctic. There were many, many new concepts that came into play, and you need to know these if you want to operate in the international sphere. Chrétien was very against being in what he called the "camp follower" relationship. He didn't want, like President Reagan and Brian Mulroney pictured there, Canada to be in that sort of subservient position. He wanted it to be more a partnership between equals. He wanted to be a cooperative partner, and he was, as I've mentioned before, good friends with Bill Clinton.

Some other concepts that I want to bring up for you to remember are this idea of subsidies. Canadians started talking about the subsidies that were being put in place by the Americans, and they started criticizing us, especially because of our logging and our subsidization of our forestry and "dumping" our forest products into the United States. So they wanted, and so did we, more codification of our relationship—more international law. That led to these ideas about NAFTA. Now, we had the Free Trade Agreement under Brian Mulroney, but NAFTA, the North American Free Trade Agreement, came into play now, and this tried to stop US trade harassment. It was not an insignificant agreement; it was trying to stop the American domination of our trading.

Some other ideas were that Canada wanted to control our oil and our energy, especially in the North and in western Canada. They wanted to make sure that Canada's oil and Canada's energy, and our huge gas resources and so on, were treated fairly in North America under the Chrétien government. There was also a lot of attention paid to services, especially Canada's banks. We have seven strong banks—Toronto-Dominion, Royal Bank, and so on—and they were becoming less competitive against the many, many American banks. Now they are very, very strong because of this initiative, and we should be thankful for that. So there's the picture of Jean Chrétien and Bill Clinton talking about how they are trading and leveraging and linking.

At the same time, the Global South, which I've symbolized here by this picture, was suffering. The new ideas we're going to get into are dispute resolution mechanisms—this is a kind of trendy word for saying, "Let's settle our conflicts with mechanisms." They talked a lot about energy protection. They wanted a level playing field with agreed-upon labor and environmental standards. That's when we started talking about expansion of the United Nations Security Council; it's expanded. We started talking about opposing the EH101 helicopters because they were too sophisticated. Canada wanted to review NORAD again, usually every five years, sometimes every three years. This was the beginning of the notion of converting bases that were too large and too costly for the Department of National Defence into, for example, peacekeeping training centers. This was the idea of democratizing foreign policy. I bring this up; it goes past you now, and maybe later when you are traveling the world on behalf of Canada, you will think of these ideas and they will compete with the kind of concepts that you see here.

This is a former Eastern European city. Look at it—I mean, people are just in these apartments living dreadful lives. No parks, no freedom; it's very difficult. Canada has a lot of new concepts. It's very attractive for immigrants; people want to come to Canada. We have the idea that people should come here because we're just and we're generous, versus a "business class" approach where you buy your way in. So these are ideas I'll talk about more when we talk about immigration and refugee policy.

The concept of sustainable development came into being at this point, and this integrated many different ideas—now 17 SDG goals—but at that time, we started talking about environmental and economic and social goals: how to make it a fair world for everyone with sustainable consumption seven generations into the future, making sure that global trade patterns from the North to the South and vice versa were fair, using appropriate technology that was solar or wind-powered, and using our resources to meet global human needs. You can see how that pattern comes right out of me because it's just natural; it's part of our way of thinking in Canada, and that's what I'm trying to teach you here: how this has evolved.

The newer concepts and issues from the 1990s also included "Greening the Rio Summit." So, what does this mean? This was the first UN summit that focused on the environment. The reason it was important was because of the guy in charge, Maurice Strong. Strong had the biggest network in the world. I saw that his address book was like a binder. He helped to craft the Agenda 21 agreement. He knew everyone everywhere. That was when they started talking about the target of 0.7% of GNP for international aid. This was an idea that came about by Pearson and the "Three Wise Men," but this is when they started actually thinking about putting it in place—"Greening GATT" and guarantees of environmental standards, ratifying the Law of the Sea (it still has not been ratified, but we still talk about it), and developing new indicators of sustainable development. Sustainability was very, very important.

Here are some pictures of Central America at the time. So, while Canada in the 1990s was developing these new ideas, in Central America we had the wars: Guatemala, Nicaragua, Panama. The environment was being destroyed; people here, you can see drug use, going through the garbage for food, and so on. Extremely distressing situations, and people wanted to help. They really wanted to help people outside of our borders, which is what we should do. 

That's when we started talking more about North-South relations instead of saying, "Oh, they're underdeveloped," or "They're less developed," or using that concept of development as if we're so developed. That's wrong. Instead, the idea was to use the concept of the "North" where people do have, it seems, a higher GNP. Now, of course, you say right away, "Well, Australia and New Zealand, they have a high income per capita, they're not in the North," but this was a general kind of concept that was popular in the 1990s. The South has a lower GNP, has a lower per capita income, maybe it's in the South. 

So the idea then was that Official Development Assistance, which we call ODA, would rise to 0.7% of GNP by the year 2000. We would also redirect CIDA's aid—CIDA is the international agency for Canada that deals with our aid—from Eastern Europe to the Third World. So instead of spending money on Ukraine and on Poland, it would go to Africa and to Asia and to South America. I'm dwelling on North-South relations because if you are interested in righting international injustice and in working in development (it's still called development), then you need to know some of these phrases if you want to work internationally, if you want to work for an NGO.

I mentioned before that this is an old picture, an old chart, and you can see that the amount of ODA as a percentage of Gross National Product for Canada kept slipping from the target. Instead of getting up to 0.7%, it kept going down and down and down. More modern is Canada's percentage compared to other countries. So you can see that Canada spends approximately 0.29% right now—it's 0.27%—but these are small amounts that are different. Look at the Danes, how much they're spending: nearly 1%. And then the Norwegians are higher than 0.7%. The US is low.

Okay, so take a look at that. There were many important reports. This was a time when we just did endless reports; everyone did reports, participated, consulted, and so on. There were Red Books, there were White Books, there were all sorts of books—colored books, Black Books, and so on. There were reports of special joint committees and bipartisan committees, reviewing committees, and Canadian foreign policy committees. I sound bored, but it was actually an interesting time because they were consulting civil society, including academics, and it was a time when we were thinking about culture. Was that a way that we could penetrate other countries like France? Who was important to Canadian culture? Know that in the 1990s, my students could name easily every single one of these people without even pausing. They knew who they all were; they were all important and significant Canadian cultural icons.

I want to mention this report because this is the idea of common security: that what I do to increase my security may decrease my adversary's security, and we need to think about common security. As a concept, it was very popular in the 1990s, and we gradually also started to think about using common security principles to assert sovereignty over Canada's territory. Why militarize the Arctic? Why decrease Russia's security and the United States' when we could be more peaceful? One of my thesis supervisors, Janice Stein, pictured here, and Maurice Archdeacon conducted this National Forum, and they solicited ideas at the time which were moved to indexes.

I bring this up because in the early 1990s and the mid-1990s, there was no internet, there were no emails. Everything was phone calls and letters and written. Imagine! Of course, I had my own consulting company, and I bring this up as a case study. Why? Because I learned a lot about negotiating and about proposals. My consulting agency was called Common Security Consultants, and we put together a proposal for a peacekeeping training center. We worked with John Savage and Alexa McDonough, Brian Mulroney, Kim Campbell, Jean Chrétien, and we tried to get everyone to cooperate on the idea. We were very successful, actually, in hindsight. 

That was our proposal—look, I even drew the red Canadian flag, can you imagine? But I asked Jeffrey Pearson if we could call it—at this point we needed a name—so I asked if we could call it the Pearson Peacekeeping Training Centre, and he said yes. This was an article by Gwynne Dyer; I remember I was thrilled for him to write anything on what we had done, and he's still writing his columns.

I reflect on this because of the lessons learned. They finally put together a privatized—it was privatized—it was called the Lester B. Pearson Canadian International Peacekeeping Training Centre. You could register there and so on. I don't know, I have mixed feelings about it. What I wanted—and it leads me to conclude almost seven years of work—is by saying that ideas can go through four phases. First, they're ignored. We were completely ignored. Then we were ridiculed—I was ridiculed. And then the idea was accepted as obvious: "We should do that." And then it was copied. There are peacekeeping training centers all around the world now, although the Canadian one has been closed.

Let me go on to the mid-1990s, where this was very important: budgets are much more important than you can imagine, and you will learn that the budget has the big impact on your toolbox. Paul Martin was the Finance Minister under Jean Chrétien; you can see them here, Paul Martin presenting his budget. And this was a cut, cut, cut budget. He cut DFAIT, the Department of Foreign Affairs and International Trade; CIDA; he transferred, he sold property; he reduced the Department of National Defence; he contracted out. But in hindsight, this cutback at the government level helped when we hit the 2008 recession, but it also helped in many ways to cut government spending. So we have to be respectful in hindsight that he made some harsh decisions, and as a result, Canada became wealthier. There was going to be less contracting out (my Common Security Consultants), less money bumping, and so this impact of this budget and the growing debt led to a final report I want to mention called the "Government of Canada toward a Rapid Reaction Capability for the UN" report. 

This was an expensive study on the 50th anniversary of the United Nations. I remember we stayed in Montebello, a very expensive hotel made out of wood outside of Montreal, and we discussed for days whether there might be a UN rapid reaction capability. I was involved because I had worked on the Pearson Peacekeeping Training Centre and had written a lot on peacekeeping training. So at that time, the government wanted Vanguard Forces, joint planning, and training. We rejected the idea of a volunteer UN force; it would be one with a combination of volunteers and professional soldiers. The main problem was that the proposal was rejected by the United States behind the scenes, and the UN just didn't have the money without the US endorsing it.

So this leads me to a small success during the 1990s. The Pearson Centre failed, and so did the rapid reaction capability idea. It failed. The landmines concept, which was a more minor concept, actually became very, very successful. So let's look at that. The Landmines Treaty was proposed in 1997, and some people will call it the "Ottawa Process" because some of the meetings were in Ottawa, Canada's capital. This was a very successful coalition between the anti-landmine coalition of NGOs—civil society NGOs—and those that were in government. Canada really called for a unilateral ban. This is interesting because we didn't hope for a negotiated multilateral ban; we just said we're going to have a unilateral ban among the countries that export them, and there won't be the further manufacture of anti-personnel landmines. 

I put a picture of a landmine there. They're very small; sometimes they look like airplanes or drones. They can be plastic or they can be metal. They're not huge landmines like anti-tank landmines, but the idea was to ban them because they killed and maimed civilians. Canada obtained a moratorium; no more of them were allowed to be produced among the signatory countries—on the production, the export, and the use of anti-personnel landmines. My friend Earl worked very hard on this, a diplomat, and then he moved into cluster mines and he was able to get that to be banned as well. 

So the Landmines Treaty was a landmark among diplomats, civil society, and NGOs. The Minister of Foreign Affairs pictured there, Lloyd Axworthy, with Jean Chrétien applauding behind him and Kofi Annan, the UN Secretary-General. So that's Lloyd Axworthy. They were very pleased with this, which was a unilateral move. Keep that in mind when you're thinking of your examples of unilateral measures that have few costs. This was just a couple of conferences—one in Oslo and one in Ottawa—and the countries came back. Sure, the United States and Russia and the big powers and South Korea did not sign the treaty, but Japan and many middle powers did. So now it's what's called an "informal regime." It's an informal regime where countries informally and formally agree not to manufacture anti-personnel landmines.

This leads me to talk about the International Criminal Court, which has to interest you if you want to go into Law, by the way. Take a look under my "Coffee Break" slides—I think I called it "I Need a Break" slides—and there is a PowerPoint production on how to get into law school if you want to get into law school. One of my first students helped to set up the International Criminal Court. She actually worked for Ambassador Kirsch on setting up the International Criminal Court. It started with this first idea of an International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia—see how you build up your ideas? Then they did one for Rwanda. Of course, they got criticized for doing one for Rwanda and not for doing one for Nicaragua or for a US hegemonic-based area. 

The principal prosecutor was a Canadian, and her name is Madame Justice Louise Arbour. If you ever want to look at a CV that is extremely impressive by a lawyer, you take a look at her and follow in her footsteps. Learn and do what she did, because you could also become incredibly important and powerful. So the International Criminal Court was formally established after 60 countries ratified the Rome Statute of the ICC. Sixty countries, but it is extremely important, and that led to Canada being seen as more important. We were working on peacekeeping, we were working on development aid, and then we were voted on and we became a member of the UN Security Council in 1999. I remember the Ambassador who was in charge, Robert Fowler; he had worked on the peacekeeping training center, and so he was allowed to chair just like Pearson had chaired the UN Security Council. So we served for a two-year term on that until the end of December 2000, and among our many responsibilities was to do sanctions against Angola. We actually didn't do a lot—we didn't do a lot—but still, it gave us an insight into what was happening internationally.

Let's think about a conceptual framework that actually describes the Chrétien government's foreign policymaking style. A simple idea is the concept of multilateralism. This is the practice of coordinating national policies in groups of three or more states. So it's not two and it's not one; it's three or more, and these can be ad hoc or they can be by means of institutions. That's the simple concept of multilateralism. 

I want to now talk about multilateralism a bit more because Canada has its own kind of version of multilateralism, which is used to describe the Chrétien government's foreign policymaking style. This is where a country works in solidarity with coalitions of states like the Commonwealth or NATO, coalitions of associations like La Francophonie, and international institutions like the United Nations and NATO, to achieve Canadian foreign policy objectives. So Canada, under the Chrétien government, was a member of more international organizations than any country in the world. We were a member of everything! And this kind of friendliness was very popular; it described the Chrétien government style.

I want to bring up another concept, which was called "directed multilateralism." This was where we argued that we should direct our foreign policy to the institutions like NATO that are best suited to Canadian requirements—NORAD and NAFTA. We should give priority to those institutions. So you see how they're starting to dilute it, and it is interesting: when you dilute it, it means you have to leave people and institutions by the wayside that you're not going to pay as much attention to.

I'm going to end with the Team Canada approach because, in the end, Jean Chrétien was a big player of hockey—he really likes hockey—and so this concept was used to describe what he did because he took Team Canada to China three times. This is a coalition of leaders from the provinces—the Premiers and the Federal government, including Quebec—and the private sector. So they tried to encourage more and more interaction with China. Team Canada approach: should we have that again with China? I'm starting to ask you these questions because at the time when Jean Chrétien was Prime Minister, Canada did really reach out to many, many countries. We didn't try to dilute our multilateralism; we didn't say, "Oh well, we're not going to be friends with the Chinese, we're not going to be friends with the Russians, we're going to keep our friends and allies to a small group." No, no. The approach was very much, "Let's try to approach South Korea, let's go to Japan, let's try to visit with everyone that we can." And so Jean Chrétien was an interesting Prime Minister in hindsight. Thank you for listening.
