Welcome to a lecture on how to meet and greet at receptions. We're going to talk about how to make conversation during a reception, how to introduce yourself, how to introduce yourself at length, how to talk when you're at a diplomatic reception carrying a lot of things including your business card, how to follow up by email, and then also a little bit on how to ask for a letter of reference from a professor and which professors to ask.

I've put some sample questions here to help you. You will be very nervous when you meet an important person like Oprah Winfrey, President Obama, President Biden, or Prime Minister Trudeau (pictured here), and so I've memorized these questions and I urge you to memorize the following questions as well to use when you're in a circle—in a diplomatic circle—and people ask you to keep the conversation going. So you could ask an elder statesperson, "You know, what are the newspapers and magazines that you can't live without?" and they will read a lot every day and they'll tell you at length about it. Listen and listen and listen. People are... you could ask them what are their favorite books? That's a long answer, and it might be only if there's only one person there, but you could also ask them what writers influenced them? And if they're a lawyer or a Chief Executive Officer (CEO), you could ask them about a law that they created.

If you're in an international reception and you want to make conversation with people where English might not be their first language—it might be more difficult for them to understand what you're saying—then it is better to go back to easy questions. So I put some questions here that are kind of easier depending on who you're speaking to. "What are the sources of your best ideas?" Let's say you were talking with someone who could not speak English very well, then you can talk about a trend. Usually people will talk about AI. Don't talk about sports. Don't talk about the Blue Jays, because people only remember that you talked about sports. "What was the most important thing that they learned?" Not what you learned, because you always want to be listening to what they have learned, not what you have learned.

In terms of your brief introductions, I would like you to picture in your mind some typical scenes at a reception, and I want you to think about how you would hold your briefcase. Let's say you're carrying a purse, you're also carrying, let's say, a drink or... we used to practice in my in-person classes with teacups and spoons, and you also have to make conversation. You may be wearing uncomfortable clothing, you may be tired, you may be wearing high heels that are painful, and when everybody is looking at you, you need to look and think about what they are seeing. So I put some pictures here of Kamala Harris during the debate with President Trump. She was complimented for how she approached President Trump during the televised debate. She was wearing quite high heels, and she walked a stride toward him and put her hand out to his height and then she shook it. That was a very important point in the debate and it told us a lot. She must have been extremely nervous although she's spoken before, and that's why I urge you to remember the five W's. So just say to yourself in that kind of atmosphere: what, where, when, why? "What am I going to say?" Just say anything to yourself. If you are nervous, focus on a box like a computer or a window and practice breathing in, looking along one edge of the box, and breathing out, and breathing in and breathing out. So you go around the box trying to calm your mind. I'd like you to practice that if you can. If you have a lot of anxiety, remember that people will not see that your legs are shaking, they will not see that you are perspiring, they will not notice if your hands are actually trembling. You might think that they're seeing all that, that they're hearing that your voice is shaking, but actually they're just focusing on you and your body language and what you're saying.

I put a picture here of a reception. So what you need to think about is what are you going to say? And where do you work, let's say, or when have you been working, and why are you working on something? Nobody will be shaking; no one will worry at all if you're shaking in your boots. Most of the time in this... this is at the United Nations, I believe. Yeah, people are wearing ties... no, this is not the United Nations, but anyway, I had another picture of the UN. Often you have to look down at their chest to see who they are. You can't go over and flip the... you can't flip their placard to see who they are, but you can ask them, "Oh, can I see that more closely?" and they'll lift it up and show it to you.

Practice your introductions of yourself in front of a mirror. Look up when you answer the phone. So when you answer the phone, look up and say your name and what you're doing, and it will make your voice sound more friendly and positive. Pretend to exchange a business card in the mirror with both hands, trying to look friendly. Where are you going to put their business card? Are you going to put it in your pocket or in your purse?

Exchanging business cards: I suggest that you develop a business card now that has a permanent address—your home, a permanent address, not a temporary address that changes all the time. I suggest that you carry them with you always in your purse and that you practice exchanging them with other people. So we used to practice in my class, for example, if you're exchanging them with Asian people, how would you bow? And you present it. Often they will look at the whole business card in front of you, examining it very closely. Do you want to put your cell phone number on your business card? I have three business cards. Only one has my cell phone number on it because I want to... and then one has my business card, and so on. So think about whether you need more than one business card. I actually have a false business card, one that has a false cell phone number on it just so that I can give it to people who I really don't want to because they'll often ask, "Well, can I have your cell phone number?" "Well, here it is. No, thank you."

Okay, is the North American introductory gesture—the basic handshake—dead? Well, as we... it doesn't... Oh, my face is there, and that's why we're not using my face in future. You'll see I don't use it anymore because I need every little bit of space here. But experts estimate that 80 to 90% of communication is nonverbal; it's body language. So it's how you portray yourself that people remember and that has the most information for them. So what about your handshake? What about the basic handshake? It is definitely not dead. And in my classes we used to practice in person to shake hands and give each other feedback. What I'd like you to do this week is to give your family and friends feedback and ask them to give you feedback about your handshake. So reach forward with your right hand and aim for the triangle in their hand, which is right here. Aim for that triangle and press against it. People will actually think that they trust you because they can feel you pressing with that triangle against their hand.

Don't do a fishy handshake. What's a fishy handshake? That's when you have a very weak handshake like that. It's just so weak it tells people... a lot of women will deliberately have a very weak handshake and that is something that you need to train yourself not to do, if I can give you some advice. So the basic handshake: you squeeze their handshake, you don't just put your fingers in there like a dead fish, and you go up and down and then you release. You do not continue to do that, which is sort of domineering as well. Some people do a kind of a basic bow, which you see the Governor General Payette doing here with the First Nations person. So practice what you're going to do and then use your fingers, as Given says here, as sort of antennae to pick up how long you're going to keep shaking hands with the people.

Now, I have very cold hands, so I often will go before a reception and I will jump up and down in the bathroom trying to make my hands warm, because if people shake my hands, you can see this look of horror across their face because they think she's like a cold, cold maiden, ice maiden. And so sometimes I'll say—if I still have very cold hands, you know, I can see their face—"Cold hands, warm heart!" Because you don't want... and also if you have what's called a death grip, try to loosen it.

Okay, after the pandemic, we were seeing more different, creative types of handshakes: the elbow or the fist bump where you just are doing that. So there's Boris Johnson doing the... looks like the elbow and the fist bump. You can also politely say... you can completely bow. So if, let's say, you're here in an airport or in a terminal and you and you're not really sure that you want to start shaking hands, there's nothing wrong with just stepping back a bit. And you'll notice that a lot of Muslim women will not shake hands with a man; they'll put their hand like this and they'll bow slightly with their hand over their heart. So here you can see King Charles, whom you would always address as King Charles, and Queen Camilla, his consort, bowing. They have to shake hands a lot. Practice with your friends this week if you can. Here's John Kennedy shaking hands with the young Bill Clinton. Obviously he... there he is pushing down a little bit, and then behind my face, which is such a nuisance and believe me we will not be using my face in future, you can see Bill Clinton and his wife Hillary Clinton and also Donald Trump when they were younger. You can always decline the basic handshake if you don't feel like shaking hands with someone. You can wave or you can smile. You do not need to actually shake hands.

The two-handed shake, let me go over that just quickly. This is where you shake their hand and then you put your hand on top a little bit so as to be more friendly, and this is showing emotion. It could be that you... here's President Trump, and I have another picture here, I think he's good at doing it, but I suggest that you use it sparingly. He's an older man with a great deal of power. So here he is with Prime Minister Abe from Japan and he held on to his hand for 19 minutes, shaking it up and down, holding on to it. This is the end of the 19 minutes. So you can do that and a lot of communication is happening there about power and friendship.

Here's President Trump also with... this is when he was running against Hillary Clinton and you can see there the basic handshake with the shake and grab. Now this I advise you not to use it in a professional setting. It can be used to show who the dominant person is if you push down, or if it's an underling, if you shake hands and you push down in an elevator pushing down—so that tells a lot. The "pat it down" among women, this is often where you put your hand forward and you're not quite giving them a hug but you're patting them on the shoulder. Now men will do that a lot, and Given believes men are more comfortable about receiving this than are women. But actually, to tell the truth, I always wear shoulder pads in business meetings and people always are grabbing me by the shoulder and so on; so I never go to a business reception without wearing a business suit. But I'm an older woman, so that's what happens.

Okay, let's keep going. The hip hop hug or pound hug, I'm not recommending that, so you can see there don't use this anymore. It should be saved for your friends. Okay, so this is a quick man-to-man greeting and it really has no place in a business setting, but I wanted to put it in there because a lot of you are Generation X and Y and now we have the new generation, Beta, coming this year, and they will be doing different types of handshakes for sure.

Moving on here, kissing. Now this is difficult because a lot of times if you're in Europe or if you're in Russia, this is definitely a type among diplomats who you know. They will grab you and start doing what's called air kissing. They're not actually kissing you; they're kissing past your shoulder into the air. It's hard to explain and sometimes they'll do it three times, sometimes they'll do it twice, so you have to remember they might be going to go again for the third time. You can practice it before traveling. It is not done a lot here in North America.

Okay, how to follow up if you meet someone. The first thing that I recommend... this is just an email I grabbed out of an email from today actually, and here I can tell immediately that the student might be using artificial intelligence, chat, to write the email because it says, "I hope this email finds you well," and it's written in Aptos 11-point font. So that tells me. But on the other hand, there are some mistakes: there's no period after "Dr." and there's a sentence fragment here—it doesn't make any sense. There's a strange use of the word "learnings," and they want to pursue graduate studies based on their performance in three second-year classes. Not a good idea because these are online courses, and as I've said over and over again, I do not do reference letters unless you absolutely have taken four of my courses and so I know you very, very well from the fourth course and you absolutely need my reference. But in this case, I have to say no, because they're trying to do graduate studies and the questions asked are about integrity, questions are asked about how I've seen you perform in a live setting. Do you have good oral presentation skills, sincerity, integrity? On and on. They have many, many questions, so I would have to say no. "Warm regards" is also a typical ChatGPT signature.

Now when you're addressing people in a reception or at the university campus, you need to remember what their rank is. And there are ranks everywhere, like in the military: colonels and lieutenant colonels, generals, brigadier generals—it goes on and on. You need to kind of study that. You can tell a lot by their insignia on their shoulders and their medals. But for professors, it's really actually quite hard. Actually, age is the best indicator; if they're older then they might be a retired professor. Don't say to them, "Oh, are you retired yet?" People keep saying to me, "Aren't you retired yet?" Extremely insulting! Don't say that. Don't say that. This professor said that to me the other day in the elevator. I was like, please! That's like saying, "Are you pregnant?" and then they're not pregnant. I'm not retired quite yet, people!

Okay, what's a full professor? A full professor can be a distinguished professor and they are distinguished because of their research, their teaching, and their service. And they are very high up; their salaries are very high up and they generally are about 50 to 70 years old. Associate professors are tenured; they have job security, they work full-time, and they can't be fired except if they do something very, very terrible. So I'm an associate professor, so I'm tenured and I work full-time on research, teaching, and administration, graduate supervision, and so on. So I have a lot of responsibilities, not just teaching. Assistant professors may just have teaching responsibilities; they may be tenure-track, they don't have tenure yet (because otherwise they'd be an associate professor), and they may often be on a temporary contract. They do have to have a doctorate; they have to have a PhD that is completely defended. Now, a doctor has a PhD that is defended and they have officially graduated with what's called a doctorate or a Doctor of Philosophy—actually PhD—there are different doctorates in education (I don't want to explain those, those are different). But a professor without a doctorate could be a high school teacher. So you could refer to a Fanshawe College or a high school teacher or college teacher as a professor even if they don't have their doctorate. It's getting a little confusing that way because then you think, "Are they a full professor?" They could be very old, so that reference letter is not as valuable on stationery as that done by the Professor Emeritus or the full professor, for sure.

And so you have to be very careful when you ask for references to make sure you're asking for references from professors who are tenured associate or full professors. Preferably the older they are, the more senior they are, the better for you for your reference letters. Now, a TA—should you ask a TA? No, not at all for a reference letter. A TA doesn't have even an MA often; so an MA is a Master of Arts. A TA doesn't have an MA and so that reference letter is certainly not as valuable. What about a BA Honors? That's a person who has a specialty, a four-year specialty in one field, so they've taken a lot of... and now finally the BA, the double major, much more popular now at Western, but it does close you off from professional programs like a further degree, an MA in your chosen field. But sometimes it can open it up; it really depends.

Okay, there's a lot of confusion, there's no rigorous rules. But let me add that if someone says ABD, that means "All But Dissertation." It means they've done the coursework for their PhD but they have not done their dissertation, and so it's just ABD. It doesn't really mean anything; in fact, you really shouldn't use it on your signature.

What about if you use on your signature "Ambassador" or "former Ambassador"? When I meet ambassadors, I always call them Ambassador even if they're retired. That's the important thing that you can do. And you'll see in our class we'll have a lot of retired ambassadors and you'll hear me continually refer to them as Ambassador. And they are required to say, "No, I've retired," but then you can continue to address them, just like a Member of Parliament: you would continue to address them as "The Honorable Member of Parliament." What about... so a former ambassador I'm covering here, you should continue to address them as Ambassador. I'm not going to cover LLM degrees here, that's a lot of different things, but let me mention that some people have many, many letters after their name. The person who I saw who had the most was Kelly Leitch, who wrote to me once—she had 17 letters. So in addition to "Doctor," she had just so many. I just looked her up on Wikipedia... there she is... and then she's got more letters... so not on Wikipedia now but she did before. So I put here some people who are calling themselves ambassadors, but they may not be ambassadors in the strictest sense.

Okay, let's talk now about emails. You can look at different people's emails. There are companies that will give you graphics and so on; you can use the Western graphic, I'll show you in a moment. I put some sample ones here. The phone number is always useful and as well you can translate it into whatever language you want if you want and add your Twitter, your web, your Instagram, your LinkedIn, your BeS, whatever you want to add, your websites and so on. You can add a contact if you are wanting people to know who to contact instead of you, and you can add... you know what I'm getting at here.

Finally, let me suggest that in the next few days while you're in the class, while we're getting ready, that you take some time to think about your email signature and write some different signatures. So you can see I have ones here for my family... say no, I use Aptos Body because I'm often using chat to fix my letters at the end. So I use Aptos Body 11 and then in my signature 10, but my confidentiality notice, my Land Acknowledgement goes on... I have one of the longer signatures that I've seen, but that's okay because it saves a lot of time and people can always find me. The media can always reach me on my phone, my cell, on everything—you can always reach me.

Okay, so that's me, but I want you to figure out your signature. Okay, thanks for that. Took us exactly 21 minutes. A bit long, one minute too long, but thank you. I probably should have stopped teaching you so much about the fish—the fish handshake. Don't do that, ladies, please don't do that. And men and women and non-binary people and everyone, just develop your handshakes so that you're confident and you smile, and that should get you a long way in the world.
