# Transcript 4A

Welcome to the lesson on Afghanistan with a little bit on Kosovo, Iraq and Mali, but what we're really focusing on in this lesson is Canada and Afghanistan. And the story I wanted to draw to your attention—we don't know this here and what the—we have no reports from Afghanistan anymore, but certainly in 2022 it was the least peaceful country in the world, and it has been for a long time. Canada's elite Joint Task Force 2, which we call JTF2, went to Afghanistan in 2001 right after 9/11, followed by other Canadian soldiers mainly based in Kandahar. I'll show you a map of where that is in a moment.

The Canadians joined Americans and British troops trying to topple the Taliban regime. The Taliban regime is now back in power. Back then the goal was to eliminate terrorist operations in Afghanistan and establish schools, particularly for women, and institutions, build a nation bent on creating a lot—some sort of lasting peace. That hope was not successful.

The elite force went in as I mentioned, and they were followed by a lot of humanitarian organizations, everyone from trainers, peace support workers. Canada spent a huge amount of money in terms of its aid. I even knew Ron Joyce, who founded Tim Hortons; he went to Afghanistan on Christmas Day to serve coffee in the Tim Hortons that they made sure was established there.

In Canada, so the first president Karzai was elected and a democrat, and they decided to authorize—the UN decided to authorize NATO to lead what was called ISAF, the International Security Assistance Force, in 2003. The United Nations simply did not have the capacity to do multi-dimensional peacekeeping operations in Afghanistan, so they authorized ISAF. Canada initially contributed 700 Canadian Forces members that were stationed in Kabul, in the capital, and in the surrounding area. Then in 2005 Canada went back to the Kandahar region, which was considered to be a very difficult region to administrate, and coinciding with the resurgence in the Taliban activity and the numbers increased to approximately 2,300. They were engaged in large-scale offensive operations, including Operation Medusa, which Harjit Sajjan, and the Minister of Defence himself participated in as a soldier in the Canadian Forces.

As the war in Afghanistan became increasingly unpopular in Canada, Canada's combat role ended in 2011, and they made the decision to train the trainers. The Department of National Defence, their focus shifted to training Afghanistan's army and its police force, but mainly its army. The RCMP also participated. Then Canada's participation was abruptly abandoned in 2014 under Prime Minister Stephen Harper. This was due to a combination of pressure from domestic pressures, reluctance to continue to contribute, political expediency, and weariness. People were tired of contributing to the war. The last of Canada's service members left in March 2014. The United States left in August 2021, seven years later. So for more than 13 years, nearly 14 years, the Canadian Forces operated and were very well equipped for a theater of war in Afghanistan. The United States also operated in Afghanistan for more than 20 years.

So where is Kandahar? You can see Kandahar in the south and Kabul, the capital, in the north—not in the north, but here closer to Pakistan, closer to the mountains. 158 members of the Canadian Forces were killed serving in the Afghan war. 158.

Let's talk about the kind of peacekeeping support operation that it was. Here you can see, taken from NATO doctrine, the concept of increasing force and violence. So Afghanistan was at this end of the scale of peace enforcement. The problems with this kind of robust peacekeeping are manifold. There are many problems with it. Sure, you can argue that it allows troops freedom to maneuver and to prevent situations where they might be taken hostage. The narrower argument is that it helps peacekeepers to implement the mandate. It relies on robust forces which are also equipped and trained to use violence. So that's one argument. Um, but essentially it—the broader interpretation is that the United Nations needed to signal to the Taliban and ISIS their resolve to implement the UN mandate and to deter threats.

Why did the United States and NATO allies withdraw? It was due to many factors ranging from the Taliban's resiliency, the emergence of ISIS or ISIL, and also significant territorial losses and casualties among Afghan National Security Forces. So after the Canadian withdrawal from Kandahar province, the Taliban and affiliated groups overran the districts and the villages that Canadian Forces had secured and built.

So defense requirements and the need to spend social spending domestically necessitated withdrawal from Afghanistan by Canada and the United States. So all these factors—everything from climate change, militarization, nationalism, poverty, and the global war on terrorism—meant that defense industries continued to ever expand. Arms sales were increasing instead of decreasing. And the arms exports to the Middle East kept increasing. Canada became the world's second-largest arms exporter to the Middle East after the United States. So Canada leapfrogged over Britain, France, Germany and Russia into second place. In 2016 it was $3.44 billion in annual sales to the Middle East. While Canadian government officials talked about respect for human rights, Canada was ranked as the world's sixth-largest weapons exporter overall. That ranking did not count Canada's unreported arms trade with the United States under the Defense Production Sharing Agreement (DPSA). We will talk more about DPSA later this term when we talk about economic cooperation with the United States.

As UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon warned back then in 2016, the world is over-armed and peace is underfunded. Even the Pope, who—the Catholic leader, of the leader of Catholics worldwide, argued, and you can read his quote there yourself in green, basically he argued that we were spending too much on... um, on... helping or on the suffering of individuals. The Canadian Prime Minister news to the international community was hailed around the world for his commitment to women's rights and LGBTQ rights. The U.S. President Barack Obama was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize, and he pledged in 2009 to abolish nuclear weapons. Yet nobody could forge peace in Afghanistan. It was very frustrating.

Even civil society organizations such as the—I'm the president of the Canadian Peace Research Association. A hundred academics focused on peace. The Rideau Institute, Project Ploughshares, Oxfam Canada, the UN Association, the World Federalist Movements—all these NGOs were being decimated by cutbacks and staffed mainly by volunteers. What remained of any protest movement tended to focus on opposing particular weapon systems, like the purchase of the new F-35 fighter jets, and they were opposed to the sale of London-built Light Armored Vehicles (LAVs), which we export to Saudi Arabia.

So, um, there was general frustration. Meanwhile, Americans were also involved in spending more on space defense, on ballistic missile defense, on pledging new B-61 bombers in Europe, and on modernizing their nuclear weapons. So while the Americans were spending more trying to defend NATO along a new Central Front in Europe, including Latvia, the Prime Minister of Canada was promising to sell more LAVs to Saudi Arabia and to contribute 250 troops to NATO's forces in Latvia. So that's a symbolic tripwire force; it is to deter the growing threat now in the wake of Ukraine. We'll talk about this later. There's many, many more rapid reaction forces that will be capable—they're not deployed there, but they will be capable of defending or deterring the growing threat from Russia.

The middle part is at the same time had to cut the United Nations' annual peacekeeping budget, and there's the UN General Assembly with the day at the front where the UN Secretary-General convenes, and he had to reduce... they can't even... they don't even have enough money to run the lights, um, on the weekends.

So Canada held a public consultation in 2016. I was part of that. Um, I mentioned before that I met with the Defence Minister. My theme was that we should have peacekeeping training and that we should kick-start a UN Emergency Force. We should re-establish the idea of a government-run Canadian Peacekeeping Training Center. So that was some of my ideas. And that harkens back to the first part of this module where I talked about the contribution of Lester B. Pearson. So, um, we had argued for the establishment of what was called the Lester—what came to be called the Lester B. Pearson Multinational Peacekeeping Training Center. Geoffrey Pearson gave me permission to use his father's name for the peacekeeping training center, and it was established in the 1990s and then it was closed by the Harper government. So it had originally—it helped to train young interns and also Canadian Forces personnel, and it helped to train peacekeepers from around the world, but then it was closed.

Here's a picture of the main part of it at Cornwallis, and I argued that we should re-establish it, not necessarily in—well, not at Cornwallis anymore, but in Kingston, Ottawa, with spokes across the country from Halifax to Vancouver. And then this would allow us to train the RCMP, the Canadian Forces and volunteer civilians.

When we first proposed this, our original proposal was to establish a Canadian and Multinational Peacekeeping Training Center at a base that was slated to be closed in Nova Scotia, and we managed to get three provincial parties and the Premier of Nova Scotia to endorse it. It took a lot of work, though, and Brian Mulroney's government and also Kim Campbell's government rejected it. But then finally, Prime Minister Jean Chrétien announced that he would convert the base in Nova Scotia to a peacekeeping training center, and lots of people trained there, including NATO personnel. It was called the Lester B. Pearson Training Center. There's obviously many things named after Pearson, including the airport and schools and so on, but we were very happy that in 1994 it was established, and it helped also in terms of NATO's Partnership for Peace because they trained countries there under Canada's MTAP (Military Training Assistance Program). I use a lot of acronyms because I'm accustomed to them, and so it's sort of strange sometimes when I have to go back to the original word. But anyway, from the start, the Pearson Center—that's what we called it—was plagued by cost-cutting and poor management and infighting about the remote location in Nova Scotia. There's the Queen.

So the future is, I think, different, and that's to move toward a United Nations Emergency Peace Service, or UNEPS. Um, I might be having a Zoom lecture on that by Dr. Peter Langille, but that's the concept that was developed in the aftermath of the 1994 Rwandan Genocide, and it was part of... um, our failed proposal to improve the United Nations' rapid deployment capacity. We did some stuff on rapid reaction, but now the argument is that a new UNEPS would be inexpensive and small. Maybe it could be deployed in Ukraine, but it would help to prevent armed conflict and it would stem atrocities like genocide from happening. It would protect desperate civilians and it would help to start a more multi-dimensional peacekeeping operation. UNEPS, it's not in place yet. So it would be... it could be an emergency 911-like force that could be relied upon. And a Canadian initiative would obviously complement our existing arrangements and reliable fast first responders, things that we have in the past extolled.

So here, Howard Langille first proposed this as a way to bridge the commitment-capacity gap, and the idea was it would complement existing arrangements and it could make, as he put it, a world of difference. So he's written a lot of books and articles and reports, and you can also hear his lectures online on...
