# Transcript 4B

Okay, so we're going to talk now in more detail about Afghanistan's dilemmas and problems, because this has been such an issue not just for Canada but for the world. And also we're bringing in this guy Dr. Saki Naimpoor who's going to talk to us about his experiences, and this is going to be like an indelible part of the class. So let's just talk a little bit more about the problems.

So what we saw with the—sort of repeat that one picture there—but as the talks dragged on and on and on, the Afghan government was still embroiled in violent conflict against the Taliban insurgency, combined with the—what I spoke about before—the territory expansion of Daesh or ISIL. So nobody was actually negotiating with ISIL, and the prospect remained that Daesh, the same thing, would take over all of the Taliban territory even if they somehow came to terms with some sort of power sharing, some sort of very unwelcome peace agreement. So, um, this was the dilemma.

And I think in hindsight that most experts agree that the Biden administration should have announced a longer withdrawal time in April of 2021. They wanted to withdraw by the 20th anniversary of 9/11 and the attack on the Pentagon and on New York City, and so they applied their own deadlines. But they should have consulted with the Afghan government and they should have withdrawn a lot more slowly.

The Afghan president Ghani was himself very isolated, withdrawn. He did not communicate except for with very senior advisors, and even then he was withdrawn from those sorts of negotiations. Combine that with the fact that the Afghan National Defense Force was not trained well enough to take on the Taliban and probably never could have been; they were a very seasoned fighting force.

The government promised not to allow Al-Qaeda a safe haven, but how would they have done that? How would they have done that? The Taliban promised to negotiate, but they abandoned those promises and they attacked all of the provincial capitals slowly over the summertime of 2020. Um, one...

So here's a quote from Karzai, the former president whom I told you about, and he was running for election again with Abdullah Abdullah, who was waiting in the wings to take over. So the whole situation, people argued, was like Vietnam and Saigon in the 1970s, that there was going to possibly be a mass exodus of the—of the government, and—and they did get ready.

So the Americans tried to persuade us, I mentioned before, to become part of the Resolute Support Mission. I mentioned before that the Afghan government only controlled 55% of the country's districts, so they were falling rapidly. And I mentioned before my trips to NATO headquarters in 2018 and 2020. So here you see I've updated the slide, and we met with Dr. John Manza, who was the—he was the highest-ranking American diplomat at NATO headquarters, in charge of all of NATO's operations including in Afghanistan, Kosovo, Ukraine and the naval operations. We met with Mark DiPaolo, who was head of NATO's operations for Afghanistan and Iraq, and we met with Megan Mainion, who was a Canadian senior political advisor at ISAF. So all these people were very helpful.

And to go on about the RSM I mentioned before, and I just want to emphasize that they kept talking about—um, about Canada's contributions to Latvia as significant. So I mentioned before in the other slides—just in case you missed that—that this peace in Afghanistan would have to somehow convert or transition the Taliban to become a political party and they would have to share constitutional power. So that was a real dilemma. And the main problem too was women's rights. How would they be protected? Would they be part of a government? The Taliban said definitely not.

So I think that the Taliban maybe will understand that if they treat women badly as before, that Afghanistan will become a pariah state and Pakistan and Iran and other countries will not want to associate with them. But the evidence of the last few weeks since they took over—since I—is that their promises are easily broken. They promised to—not to attack civilians, and they did; they're beating women in the streets.

More than 40,000 members of the Canadian Armed Forces served in Afghanistan, rotating over nearly 14 years. And as I mentioned so many times now, 158 Canadian Armed Forces members died. So now what should be done? So many, um, women were left behind. We helped them to enter the workforce; what will happen now?

Seven Canadian civilians also passed away, with many, many veterans suffering still from PTSD, and they will be recovering for decades. So for those of us that were involved with Afghanistan and we want to help now, we're talking about trying to solve these dilemmas and problems. One option would be to sponsor a refugee on our own, but then we would have to join with other organizations, because the Canadian rule is that you have to explain how you will feed and house families of five or more, and how will you get that money together? Uh, you—if you're a private sponsor, you can work with groups of five, like an NGO or church, but you will as a sponsorship agreement holder face heavy bureaucratic burdens. And we found that—that it's very difficult to sponsor Afghans. There's a lot of paperwork and administration and a lot of money that's needed to be put down.

We also would need eventually to get the applicant recognized as a refugee by the United Nations Refugee Agency, UNHCR, or as a refugee by a foreign state. And of course the Taliban is not going to do that. So I had initially advised Afghans stuck in Afghanistan to take any kind of transportation to get out, to India, Pakistan, to take buses to get out of Kabul. But that advice gradually became much more dangerous, because if they move around their passports will be seen. Taliban are blocking roads, they're searching houses, they're taking people's cell phones away. Some friends of mine are hiding in their basements, fearful of being captured.

As one colleague wrote to me—[sic] means that his English is not very good—"We're still alive but any second could end the life, my life anytime. I can't stay in one place, I'm changing my location every time. In this time there's no way to escape from the Taliban." And then he went on to write, "The only way I can see that the US Army helicopter swings save us to take us to Kabul airfield, then another country. Otherwise we have no way to become new refugees. I've lost my sleep. I don't know where I'm going." So this was all happening in August of 2021. It's very, very concerning.

Even if colleagues—I knew a family of five—they did reach the Kabul airfield, but two weeks after it was closed down. The runways were full of American and European planes transporting out their own citizens and people who had helped them. U.S. President also promised to keep bringing out Afghan interpreters and embassy staff, so it was full.

So what will Canada do over the long term? The Prime Minister promised to take in 40,000 Afghan refugees, but now there is a huge backlog. And compared to his promise to take in large numbers of Syrian refugees—he promised to take in twenty thousand—this will be a daunting promise to fulfill. So Canada brought in nearly 40,000—39,636—Syrian refugees in a very short time period. I don't know if you remember that, but Trudeau said that was a very poignant part of his, um, life, and he remembered that a great deal. He mentions it a lot.

But there are more than 5 million Afghans in Kabul, in the capital city, which is almost half the urban population of the country. And there are 36.6 million people in the entire country of Afghanistan. So it is impossible to help them all. It's a small, strife-ridden, not peaceful, mountainous country about the size of Ontario, and it will be powerfully affected by drought and natural disasters in the future due to climate change. And yet it has the same approximate population size as Canada.

So we can blame NATO officials for not publicly protesting when President Biden and the Secretary of State Antony Blinken said that—suddenly announced that the withdrawal would be complete by the anniversary of 9/11. We can blame them for settling on that kind of time—or not conditions-based, but time-based approach. Maybe that was wrong. The date was arbitrarily chosen; it was just based on American needs, not on Afghan requirements. So NATO allies started withdrawing from RSM by May the 1st. So here they are at NATO headquarters in mid-April deciding, because the Americans wanted to pull out, all the NATO allies said, "Well, we'll all pull out then." See how they're all consulting by Zoom; this is during COVID. And they all decided to withdraw.

So the Afghan army is also at fault because it was corrupt, under-trained, poorly equipped. And once the Taliban warlords began to threaten the local warlords, then the soldiers stripped off their uniforms and some even joined the Taliban, raced away, or just disappeared into the rural areas. The Americans were firing from afar, but the concept of supporting the Afghan military from outside the country—somehow using American bases and personnel—was put forward, but that's not gonna—that's not gonna work. That's very impractical; it's not very well conceived of.

Many citizens in Kabul did rejoice because Ashraf Ghani—um, he—he had a very corrupt government, far removed from power, withdrawn from the people, unresponsive. And so if he had won the election again in September, I think that there would have been some measures of dissonance and revolution. We know now that Ghani, when he left in the helicopters, stole $169 million in cash, and he threw $49 million down on the tarmac for his private guards to loot and take home. So the corruption was endemic—meaning widespread—and the president needed to resign a long time ago, well before the end of his eight-year mandate.

The poor Afghans will probably spit on Ghani's image and curse him for hightailing it out of the country in his own planes with about 200 aides who have since then dispersed around the world, some keeping their titles, others resigning, all of them perhaps lobbying for more money and more armaments. It's likely that there will be a civil war in Afghanistan that's decades long, because there are too many rifles, too many weapons, and the air defense system could be taken over by the Taliban.

On future September 11th anniversaries, if any Western journalists are still reporting from Afghanistan, we can expect to see American equipment paraded through the streets by Taliban fighters. Even Biden's top security advisor admitted that the U.S. lost track of billions of dollars of military equipment that it had gifted the Afghan military. So it's all left there. Intelligence assessments had predicted that the Afghan National Army could hold off the Taliban for one to two years, but they were totally wrong. They were unable—not even to do it for a few weeks. The Afghan forces entirely failed to hold off the Taliban, and so we need to ask Dr. Naimpoor this question is: why were they so deluded? Why did they leave so much military equipment behind? What were all these errors? And, and you know, they have serious implications for the future.

I am still sad to receive emails from colleagues that I knew, that I had met at conferences, begging me to help them. One email I met from a politician and a peace researcher in Astana in Kazakhstan. He explained in broken English that he's underground, he does not know where his family is, and he does not know whether he should stay underground to try to escape or not. So, quote from him: "But today I'm going outside from Kabul City. If God save my life I will never forget this. Thanks everyone who helped you about my case." I was trying to help his case and so on.

So I did not hear from him since we'd been in Kazakhstan; I barely knew him, but he—he wrote me last August that his life was in danger and so on. And as the brother of a warlord, his case had been covered in the *New York Times*, so they had his name, and he'd been trying to negotiate peace instead of war. So they knew—they will find out who he is. He has escaped though.

So I knew he had learned—if I know that he's lent foreigners his vehicles and guards so they can travel and try to negotiate peace with the Taliban, then others know this too. So he wasn't safe and had to escape. He did escape. And this is, um, his kind of last rejoinder: "I'm proud about that because that was my duty to bring peace to my country." He tried to bring peace, because remember I'm the president of the Canadian Peace Research Association, so I tried to help him. But basically his whole life was ripped asunder; it was ripped apart, and I have been trying to lobby for the innocent since then.

Okay, I think that's where we're at today, and thanks for listening. No, obviously me just trying to add one more slide, but just that that they're stalling, and that the Biden government—they haven't even tried to do any kind of even showcase or to pretend that they're doing a proactive diplomacy. So that leaves them open to criticisms by the Trump, um, elect people who run for the Republicans, that—that the Biden government hasn't done enough.

This idea of buffer zones—I don't think it can work. I looked through these slides today and I thought, well, could we do that? And it's an idea that I put forward at the end of this presentation. Um, but really the problems are deeply embedded: favoritism, cronyism, a culture of warlordism. Maybe we could have zones of peace or buffer zones; we could have had that, maybe, a couple years ago. This is the idea that we can somehow protect sites whether they're holy sites or grant people... allow asylum.

So to end, to bring it all together: we need the United Nations, a United Nations Emergency Peace Service. We need more trained peacekeepers to try to establish buffer zones, neutral zones, demarcation lines. For example, there was a Zone of Peace, Freedom and Neutrality in the Philippines. We need to think about how we can provide local sanctuary in the middle of violent conflict. End on a kind of more... um... I'm just going to take this phone... um... we can create safe havens, communities of peace, Days of Tranquility and operational lifelines with the United Nations, hopefully.

Thank you for listening.
