# Transcript 4A

Welcome to the lesson on Afghanistan with a little bit on Kosovo, Iraq and Mali, but what we're really focusing on in this lesson is Canada and Afghanistan. And the story I wanted to draw to your attention—we don't know this here and what the—we have no reports from Afghanistan anymore, but certainly in 2022 it was the least peaceful country in the world, and it has been for a long time. Canada's elite Joint Task Force 2, which we call JTF2, went to Afghanistan in 2001 right after 9/11, followed by other Canadian soldiers mainly based in Kandahar. I'll show you a map of where that is in a moment.

The Canadians joined Americans and British troops trying to topple the Taliban regime. The Taliban regime is now back in power. Back then the goal was to eliminate terrorist operations in Afghanistan and establish schools, particularly for women, and institutions, build a nation bent on creating a lot—some sort of lasting peace. That hope was not successful.

The elite force went in as I mentioned, and they were followed by a lot of humanitarian organizations, everyone from trainers, peace support workers. Canada spent a huge amount of money in terms of its aid. I even knew Ron Joyce, who founded Tim Hortons; he went to Afghanistan on Christmas Day to serve coffee in the Tim Hortons that they made sure was established there.

In Canada, so the first president Karzai was elected and a democrat, and they decided to authorize—the UN decided to authorize NATO to lead what was called ISAF, the International Security Assistance Force, in 2003. The United Nations simply did not have the capacity to do multi-dimensional peacekeeping operations in Afghanistan, so they authorized ISAF. Canada initially contributed 700 Canadian Forces members that were stationed in Kabul, in the capital, and in the surrounding area. Then in 2005 Canada went back to the Kandahar region, which was considered to be a very difficult region to administrate, and coinciding with the resurgence in the Taliban activity and the numbers increased to approximately 2,300. They were engaged in large-scale offensive operations, including Operation Medusa, which Harjit Sajjan, and the Minister of Defence himself participated in as a soldier in the Canadian Forces.

As the war in Afghanistan became increasingly unpopular in Canada, Canada's combat role ended in 2011, and they made the decision to train the trainers. The Department of National Defence, their focus shifted to training Afghanistan's army and its police force, but mainly its army. The RCMP also participated. Then Canada's participation was abruptly abandoned in 2014 under Prime Minister Stephen Harper. This was due to a combination of pressure from domestic pressures, reluctance to continue to contribute, political expediency, and weariness. People were tired of contributing to the war. The last of Canada's service members left in March 2014. The United States left in August 2021, seven years later. So for more than 13 years, nearly 14 years, the Canadian Forces operated and were very well equipped for a theater of war in Afghanistan. The United States also operated in Afghanistan for more than 20 years.

So where is Kandahar? You can see Kandahar in the south and Kabul, the capital, in the north—not in the north, but here closer to Pakistan, closer to the mountains. 158 members of the Canadian Forces were killed serving in the Afghan war. 158.

Let's talk about the kind of peacekeeping support operation that it was. Here you can see, taken from NATO doctrine, the concept of increasing force and violence. So Afghanistan was at this end of the scale of peace enforcement. The problems with this kind of robust peacekeeping are manifold. There are many problems with it. Sure, you can argue that it allows troops freedom to maneuver and to prevent situations where they might be taken hostage. The narrower argument is that it helps peacekeepers to implement the mandate. It relies on robust forces which are also equipped and trained to use violence. So that's one argument. Um, but essentially it—the broader interpretation is that the United Nations needed to signal to the Taliban and ISIS their resolve to implement the UN mandate and to deter threats.

Why did the United States and NATO allies withdraw? It was due to many factors ranging from the Taliban's resiliency, the emergence of ISIS or ISIL, and also significant territorial losses and casualties among Afghan National Security Forces. So after the Canadian withdrawal from Kandahar province, the Taliban and affiliated groups overran the districts and the villages that Canadian Forces had secured and built.

So defense requirements and the need to spend social spending domestically necessitated withdrawal from Afghanistan by Canada and the United States. So all these factors—everything from climate change, militarization, nationalism, poverty, and the global war on terrorism—meant that defense industries continued to ever expand. Arms sales were increasing instead of decreasing. And the arms exports to the Middle East kept increasing. Canada became the world's second-largest arms exporter to the Middle East after the United States. So Canada leapfrogged over Britain, France, Germany and Russia into second place. In 2016 it was $3.44 billion in annual sales to the Middle East. While Canadian government officials talked about respect for human rights, Canada was ranked as the world's sixth-largest weapons exporter overall. That ranking did not count Canada's unreported arms trade with the United States under the Defense Production Sharing Agreement (DPSA). We will talk more about DPSA later this term when we talk about economic cooperation with the United States.

As UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon warned back then in 2016, the world is over-armed and peace is underfunded. Even the Pope, who—the Catholic leader, of the leader of Catholics worldwide, argued, and you can read his quote there yourself in green, basically he argued that we were spending too much on... um, on... helping or on the suffering of individuals. The Canadian Prime Minister news to the international community was hailed around the world for his commitment to women's rights and LGBTQ rights. The U.S. President Barack Obama was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize, and he pledged in 2009 to abolish nuclear weapons. Yet nobody could forge peace in Afghanistan. It was very frustrating.

Even civil society organizations such as the—I'm the president of the Canadian Peace Research Association. A hundred academics focused on peace. The Rideau Institute, Project Ploughshares, Oxfam Canada, the UN Association, the World Federalist Movements—all these NGOs were being decimated by cutbacks and staffed mainly by volunteers. What remained of any protest movement tended to focus on opposing particular weapon systems, like the purchase of the new F-35 fighter jets, and they were opposed to the sale of London-built Light Armored Vehicles (LAVs), which we export to Saudi Arabia.

So, um, there was general frustration. Meanwhile, Americans were also involved in spending more on space defense, on ballistic missile defense, on pledging new B-61 bombers in Europe, and on modernizing their nuclear weapons. So while the Americans were spending more trying to defend NATO along a new Central Front in Europe, including Latvia, the Prime Minister of Canada was promising to sell more LAVs to Saudi Arabia and to contribute 250 troops to NATO's forces in Latvia. So that's a symbolic tripwire force; it is to deter the growing threat now in the wake of Ukraine. We'll talk about this later. There's many, many more rapid reaction forces that will be capable—they're not deployed there, but they will be capable of defending or deterring the growing threat from Russia.

The middle part is at the same time had to cut the United Nations' annual peacekeeping budget, and there's the UN General Assembly with the day at the front where the UN Secretary-General convenes, and he had to reduce... they can't even... they don't even have enough money to run the lights, um, on the weekends.

So Canada held a public consultation in 2016. I was part of that. Um, I mentioned before that I met with the Defence Minister. My theme was that we should have peacekeeping training and that we should kick-start a UN Emergency Force. We should re-establish the idea of a government-run Canadian Peacekeeping Training Center. So that was some of my ideas. And that harkens back to the first part of this module where I talked about the contribution of Lester B. Pearson. So, um, we had argued for the establishment of what was called the Lester—what came to be called the Lester B. Pearson Multinational Peacekeeping Training Center. Geoffrey Pearson gave me permission to use his father's name for the peacekeeping training center, and it was established in the 1990s and then it was closed by the Harper government. So it had originally—it helped to train young interns and also Canadian Forces personnel, and it helped to train peacekeepers from around the world, but then it was closed.

Here's a picture of the main part of it at Cornwallis, and I argued that we should re-establish it, not necessarily in—well, not at Cornwallis anymore, but in Kingston, Ottawa, with spokes across the country from Halifax to Vancouver. And then this would allow us to train the RCMP, the Canadian Forces and volunteer civilians.

When we first proposed this, our original proposal was to establish a Canadian and Multinational Peacekeeping Training Center at a base that was slated to be closed in Nova Scotia, and we managed to get three provincial parties and the Premier of Nova Scotia to endorse it. It took a lot of work, though, and Brian Mulroney's government and also Kim Campbell's government rejected it. But then finally, Prime Minister Jean Chrétien announced that he would convert the base in Nova Scotia to a peacekeeping training center, and lots of people trained there, including NATO personnel. It was called the Lester B. Pearson Training Center. There's obviously many things named after Pearson, including the airport and schools and so on, but we were very happy that in 1994 it was established, and it helped also in terms of NATO's Partnership for Peace because they trained countries there under Canada's MTAP (Military Training Assistance Program). I use a lot of acronyms because I'm accustomed to them, and so it's sort of strange sometimes when I have to go back to the original word. But anyway, from the start, the Pearson Center—that's what we called it—was plagued by cost-cutting and poor management and infighting about the remote location in Nova Scotia. There's the Queen.

So the future is, I think, different, and that's to move toward a United Nations Emergency Peace Service, or UNEPS. Um, I might be having a Zoom lecture on that by Dr. Peter Langille, but that's the concept that was developed in the aftermath of the 1994 Rwandan Genocide, and it was part of... um, our failed proposal to improve the United Nations' rapid deployment capacity. We did some stuff on rapid reaction, but now the argument is that a new UNEPS would be inexpensive and small. Maybe it could be deployed in Ukraine, but it would help to prevent armed conflict and it would stem atrocities like genocide from happening. It would protect desperate civilians and it would help to start a more multi-dimensional peacekeeping operation. UNEPS, it's not in place yet. So it would be... it could be an emergency 911-like force that could be relied upon. And a Canadian initiative would obviously complement our existing arrangements and reliable fast first responders, things that we have in the past extolled.

So here, Howard Langille first proposed this as a way to bridge the commitment-capacity gap, and the idea was it would complement existing arrangements and it could make, as he put it, a world of difference. So he's written a lot of books and articles and reports, and you can also hear his lectures online on...

# Transcript 4B

Okay, so we're going to talk now in more detail about Afghanistan's dilemmas and problems, because this has been such an issue not just for Canada but for the world. And also we're bringing in this guy Dr. Saki Naimpoor who's going to talk to us about his experiences, and this is going to be like an indelible part of the class. So let's just talk a little bit more about the problems.

So what we saw with the—sort of repeat that one picture there—but as the talks dragged on and on and on, the Afghan government was still embroiled in violent conflict against the Taliban insurgency, combined with the—what I spoke about before—the territory expansion of Daesh or ISIL. So nobody was actually negotiating with ISIL, and the prospect remained that Daesh, the same thing, would take over all of the Taliban territory even if they somehow came to terms with some sort of power sharing, some sort of very unwelcome peace agreement. So, um, this was the dilemma.

And I think in hindsight that most experts agree that the Biden administration should have announced a longer withdrawal time in April of 2021. They wanted to withdraw by the 20th anniversary of 9/11 and the attack on the Pentagon and on New York City, and so they applied their own deadlines. But they should have consulted with the Afghan government and they should have withdrawn a lot more slowly.

The Afghan president Ghani was himself very isolated, withdrawn. He did not communicate except for with very senior advisors, and even then he was withdrawn from those sorts of negotiations. Combine that with the fact that the Afghan National Defense Force was not trained well enough to take on the Taliban and probably never could have been; they were a very seasoned fighting force.

The government promised not to allow Al-Qaeda a safe haven, but how would they have done that? How would they have done that? The Taliban promised to negotiate, but they abandoned those promises and they attacked all of the provincial capitals slowly over the summertime of 2020. Um, one...

So here's a quote from Karzai, the former president whom I told you about, and he was running for election again with Abdullah Abdullah, who was waiting in the wings to take over. So the whole situation, people argued, was like Vietnam and Saigon in the 1970s, that there was going to possibly be a mass exodus of the—of the government, and—and they did get ready.

So the Americans tried to persuade us, I mentioned before, to become part of the Resolute Support Mission. I mentioned before that the Afghan government only controlled 55% of the country's districts, so they were falling rapidly. And I mentioned before my trips to NATO headquarters in 2018 and 2020. So here you see I've updated the slide, and we met with Dr. John Manza, who was the—he was the highest-ranking American diplomat at NATO headquarters, in charge of all of NATO's operations including in Afghanistan, Kosovo, Ukraine and the naval operations. We met with Mark DiPaolo, who was head of NATO's operations for Afghanistan and Iraq, and we met with Megan Mainion, who was a Canadian senior political advisor at ISAF. So all these people were very helpful.

And to go on about the RSM I mentioned before, and I just want to emphasize that they kept talking about—um, about Canada's contributions to Latvia as significant. So I mentioned before in the other slides—just in case you missed that—that this peace in Afghanistan would have to somehow convert or transition the Taliban to become a political party and they would have to share constitutional power. So that was a real dilemma. And the main problem too was women's rights. How would they be protected? Would they be part of a government? The Taliban said definitely not.

So I think that the Taliban maybe will understand that if they treat women badly as before, that Afghanistan will become a pariah state and Pakistan and Iran and other countries will not want to associate with them. But the evidence of the last few weeks since they took over—since I—is that their promises are easily broken. They promised to—not to attack civilians, and they did; they're beating women in the streets.

More than 40,000 members of the Canadian Armed Forces served in Afghanistan, rotating over nearly 14 years. And as I mentioned so many times now, 158 Canadian Armed Forces members died. So now what should be done? So many, um, women were left behind. We helped them to enter the workforce; what will happen now?

Seven Canadian civilians also passed away, with many, many veterans suffering still from PTSD, and they will be recovering for decades. So for those of us that were involved with Afghanistan and we want to help now, we're talking about trying to solve these dilemmas and problems. One option would be to sponsor a refugee on our own, but then we would have to join with other organizations, because the Canadian rule is that you have to explain how you will feed and house families of five or more, and how will you get that money together? Uh, you—if you're a private sponsor, you can work with groups of five, like an NGO or church, but you will as a sponsorship agreement holder face heavy bureaucratic burdens. And we found that—that it's very difficult to sponsor Afghans. There's a lot of paperwork and administration and a lot of money that's needed to be put down.

We also would need eventually to get the applicant recognized as a refugee by the United Nations Refugee Agency, UNHCR, or as a refugee by a foreign state. And of course the Taliban is not going to do that. So I had initially advised Afghans stuck in Afghanistan to take any kind of transportation to get out, to India, Pakistan, to take buses to get out of Kabul. But that advice gradually became much more dangerous, because if they move around their passports will be seen. Taliban are blocking roads, they're searching houses, they're taking people's cell phones away. Some friends of mine are hiding in their basements, fearful of being captured.

As one colleague wrote to me—[sic] means that his English is not very good—"We're still alive but any second could end the life, my life anytime. I can't stay in one place, I'm changing my location every time. In this time there's no way to escape from the Taliban." And then he went on to write, "The only way I can see that the US Army helicopter swings save us to take us to Kabul airfield, then another country. Otherwise we have no way to become new refugees. I've lost my sleep. I don't know where I'm going." So this was all happening in August of 2021. It's very, very concerning.

Even if colleagues—I knew a family of five—they did reach the Kabul airfield, but two weeks after it was closed down. The runways were full of American and European planes transporting out their own citizens and people who had helped them. U.S. President also promised to keep bringing out Afghan interpreters and embassy staff, so it was full.

So what will Canada do over the long term? The Prime Minister promised to take in 40,000 Afghan refugees, but now there is a huge backlog. And compared to his promise to take in large numbers of Syrian refugees—he promised to take in twenty thousand—this will be a daunting promise to fulfill. So Canada brought in nearly 40,000—39,636—Syrian refugees in a very short time period. I don't know if you remember that, but Trudeau said that was a very poignant part of his, um, life, and he remembered that a great deal. He mentions it a lot.

But there are more than 5 million Afghans in Kabul, in the capital city, which is almost half the urban population of the country. And there are 36.6 million people in the entire country of Afghanistan. So it is impossible to help them all. It's a small, strife-ridden, not peaceful, mountainous country about the size of Ontario, and it will be powerfully affected by drought and natural disasters in the future due to climate change. And yet it has the same approximate population size as Canada.

So we can blame NATO officials for not publicly protesting when President Biden and the Secretary of State Antony Blinken said that—suddenly announced that the withdrawal would be complete by the anniversary of 9/11. We can blame them for settling on that kind of time—or not conditions-based, but time-based approach. Maybe that was wrong. The date was arbitrarily chosen; it was just based on American needs, not on Afghan requirements. So NATO allies started withdrawing from RSM by May the 1st. So here they are at NATO headquarters in mid-April deciding, because the Americans wanted to pull out, all the NATO allies said, "Well, we'll all pull out then." See how they're all consulting by Zoom; this is during COVID. And they all decided to withdraw.

So the Afghan army is also at fault because it was corrupt, under-trained, poorly equipped. And once the Taliban warlords began to threaten the local warlords, then the soldiers stripped off their uniforms and some even joined the Taliban, raced away, or just disappeared into the rural areas. The Americans were firing from afar, but the concept of supporting the Afghan military from outside the country—somehow using American bases and personnel—was put forward, but that's not gonna—that's not gonna work. That's very impractical; it's not very well conceived of.

Many citizens in Kabul did rejoice because Ashraf Ghani—um, he—he had a very corrupt government, far removed from power, withdrawn from the people, unresponsive. And so if he had won the election again in September, I think that there would have been some measures of dissonance and revolution. We know now that Ghani, when he left in the helicopters, stole $169 million in cash, and he threw $49 million down on the tarmac for his private guards to loot and take home. So the corruption was endemic—meaning widespread—and the president needed to resign a long time ago, well before the end of his eight-year mandate.

The poor Afghans will probably spit on Ghani's image and curse him for hightailing it out of the country in his own planes with about 200 aides who have since then dispersed around the world, some keeping their titles, others resigning, all of them perhaps lobbying for more money and more armaments. It's likely that there will be a civil war in Afghanistan that's decades long, because there are too many rifles, too many weapons, and the air defense system could be taken over by the Taliban.

On future September 11th anniversaries, if any Western journalists are still reporting from Afghanistan, we can expect to see American equipment paraded through the streets by Taliban fighters. Even Biden's top security advisor admitted that the U.S. lost track of billions of dollars of military equipment that it had gifted the Afghan military. So it's all left there. Intelligence assessments had predicted that the Afghan National Army could hold off the Taliban for one to two years, but they were totally wrong. They were unable—not even to do it for a few weeks. The Afghan forces entirely failed to hold off the Taliban, and so we need to ask Dr. Naimpoor this question is: why were they so deluded? Why did they leave so much military equipment behind? What were all these errors? And, and you know, they have serious implications for the future.

I am still sad to receive emails from colleagues that I knew, that I had met at conferences, begging me to help them. One email I met from a politician and a peace researcher in Astana in Kazakhstan. He explained in broken English that he's underground, he does not know where his family is, and he does not know whether he should stay underground to try to escape or not. So, quote from him: "But today I'm going outside from Kabul City. If God save my life I will never forget this. Thanks everyone who helped you about my case." I was trying to help his case and so on.

So I did not hear from him since we'd been in Kazakhstan; I barely knew him, but he—he wrote me last August that his life was in danger and so on. And as the brother of a warlord, his case had been covered in the *New York Times*, so they had his name, and he'd been trying to negotiate peace instead of war. So they knew—they will find out who he is. He has escaped though.

So I knew he had learned—if I know that he's lent foreigners his vehicles and guards so they can travel and try to negotiate peace with the Taliban, then others know this too. So he wasn't safe and had to escape. He did escape. And this is, um, his kind of last rejoinder: "I'm proud about that because that was my duty to bring peace to my country." He tried to bring peace, because remember I'm the president of the Canadian Peace Research Association, so I tried to help him. But basically his whole life was ripped asunder; it was ripped apart, and I have been trying to lobby for the innocent since then.

Okay, I think that's where we're at today, and thanks for listening. No, obviously me just trying to add one more slide, but just that that they're stalling, and that the Biden government—they haven't even tried to do any kind of even showcase or to pretend that they're doing a proactive diplomacy. So that leaves them open to criticisms by the Trump, um, elect people who run for the Republicans, that—that the Biden government hasn't done enough.

This idea of buffer zones—I don't think it can work. I looked through these slides today and I thought, well, could we do that? And it's an idea that I put forward at the end of this presentation. Um, but really the problems are deeply embedded: favoritism, cronyism, a culture of warlordism. Maybe we could have zones of peace or buffer zones; we could have had that, maybe, a couple years ago. This is the idea that we can somehow protect sites whether they're holy sites or grant people... allow asylum.

So to end, to bring it all together: we need the United Nations, a United Nations Emergency Peace Service. We need more trained peacekeepers to try to establish buffer zones, neutral zones, demarcation lines. For example, there was a Zone of Peace, Freedom and Neutrality in the Philippines. We need to think about how we can provide local sanctuary in the middle of violent conflict. End on a kind of more... um... I'm just going to take this phone... um... we can create safe havens, communities of peace, Days of Tranquility and operational lifelines with the United Nations, hopefully.

Thank you for listening.
### Transcript 4C

A little bit about him and um, sorry, it's telling me that the recording is in progress uh right now. I'm not certain if I'm allowed to divulge your current position but he a few weeks ago was the senior advisor to the Minister of Defense of Afghanistan and he graduated with his PhD last August from our department, the political science department at the University of Western Ontario. So this event is also co-sponsored by our department. Our department is in a retreat today so they could not come, which is a long story. Saki Nampour specializes in international security policy and NATO-led capacity building initiatives. He's also a registered business executive member of the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation and you can reach him by Gmail. My name is Erica Simpson and I'm also a speaker here and so I prepared a video for about 15 minutes for people here and we're going to play that first I think and then that will help, you'll see I recorded it. I had to record it before May 7th so I recorded it in the wake of NATO and the uh Germany and Italy and the United States announcements that they would uh withdraw from Afghanistan. So I'm not sure if the room monitor, can you flip on the, the um recording?

Hi everyone, my name is Erica Simpson and I'm introducing myself today actually so if you don't mind I'll I'll share a screen and uh so I have a PhD in that made from the University of Toronto and I'm an associate professor of IR at Western University and I'm also the president and program chair of the Canadian Peace Research Association. So my main research interests are in International Security and North American foreign and defense policy, particularly Arms Control, disarmament, nuclear issues, nuclear waste and peacekeeping in Afghanistan and also in Canada. I have written a book "NATO and the Bomb" and many other articles that have appeared in various journals, some of them listed there, including most recently the Brown Journal of World Politics. I'm a national syndicated columnist for Postmedia and also I write a regular column for The Hill Times. Uh, what else can I tell you about? I serve as a director on the board of the Canadian Pugwash Group and then I'm an invited consultant and peer reviewer for various things. I was formerly a Fellow, Alton Jones Fellow, Barton Fellow and Liu Institute Fellow, NATO Fellow and Treasurer and Vice Chair of the Canadian Pugwash Group. So in 2015 I'm very proud that the Voice of Women awarded me the Shirley Farlinger Lifetime Achievement Award for peace writings.

So I'm going to be talking to you today about Afghanistan and I was hoping uh to just introduce you some of the problems and the dilemmas of Afghanistan. So I'll just share another screen with you and we will go through my PowerPoint together quickly. Okay, so Afghanistan, and I'll just, I'd like to use the laser pointer, give me a second, highlighter and there we are. Okay, so I will be speaking on Wednesday June the 2nd from 10:00 to 10:30 a.m. and I hope to bring in a special guest who I want to tell you a little bit more about in a few moments.

So the conflict in Afghanistan is one of the bloodiest in the world and it's the tenacity of the Taliban, ISIS or ISIL and the Al-Qaeda network that mean that the country cannot continue uh without to operate without help from NATO. So often barrages of rockets hit the heavily fortified Green Zone where many embassies and international firms are based in the capital of Kabul. So the number that are killed every day is unclear but for example in November last year 22 people were killed and 27 were wounded when three ISIS-affiliated gunmen rampaged through Kabul University spraying classrooms with bullets for several hours. So now that the United States and NATO have decided to entirely withdraw from Afghanistan by September 11th, observers and Afghans are worried about attacks on the city's universities, the single international airport and also on the fortified Green Zone. Nobody knows why these attacks are carried out, whether it's to pressure or defame or make the government look weak in front of its citizens or to strengthen positions at various uh bargaining tables. However, the debate at NATO continues to be whether it was short-sighted for the incoming U.S. Administration under President Joe Biden to entirely first decide to drastically reduce then entirely eliminate by September the number of American troops in Afghanistan this year.

The NATO allies are all following the United States lead and they have all decided to withdraw by September 11th. So the risk is high that insurgents pinktured here take over and the country becomes a strategic holding ground for the world's wealthiest and most lethal terrorist groups. The intra-Afghan negotiations here, pictured here with the Taliban and elected governments' representatives, were tasked in September 2020 to find a long-term agreement, but the two-sided talks that aim to end literally decades of war have accomplished very little and are stalled in Doha, Qatar. The army is underprepared and the police force to conduct a sustained campaign against the adversaries attacking in the rural areas pictured here. Afghan forces will need rigorous Security Sector Reform, which means more discipline and professionalization due in part to the army's corruption and its drug use. What is Security Sector Reform (SSR)? The air-to-ground integration capability and the Afghan Air Force's A-29s given to them by the United States are proving sufficient, but a new city-by-city defense plan needs a assiduous implementation here. So here you can see the ground troops and the preparation of the National Army.

The NATO-led Resolute Support Mission or RSM was launched in 2015 and it was launched after ISAF ended in 2014. So RSM provides training, advice, and assistance and that will end its mission and withdraw by September. So approximately 12,000 personnel from 30 NATO member states and eight partner countries have been deployed in RSM and they are operating in a non-combat mission from one central haven, Kabul, with spokes in four directions. The NATO Secretary General, here is NATO headquarters in Brussels uh and that's the the 30 uh flags of the 30 countries remain committed they say to Afghanistan despite ending RSM and the United States separate combat mission which is Operation Freedom's Sentinel. So the separate contingent of U.S. forces participated in force protection, in logistical support and counter-terrorism activities and this is according to various reports.

Do you think that the United States should have remained in Afghanistan and for how much longer? Do you think they should remain another 21 years, another four years until November? You may want to reflect at this point upon the implications of long-term involvement. However, please pay attention uh to the pictures taken by Dr. Saki Nampour here. He is the senior advisor to the Minister of Defense in Afghanistan and he successfully defended his PhD dissertation on SSR under my supervision in August 2020 and departed the next day for Afghanistan where he's on the war front. And I'm hoping to bring him in by military satellite phone from the war front in June. He just texted me uh he just literally texted me on my phone and there might be some interesting issues in that regard. Saki and his boss the President of Afghanistan, Ashraf Ghani, were taken by surprise in April just like me because we thought that the United States would undertake a conditions-based withdrawal and that this would last perhaps until the end of November and then at that point the United States would pause its troop reductions and reassess the situation. This was certainly indicated by then-U.S. Secretary of Defense Mark Esper. But Esper was fired by President Donald Trump on November 10th and that upended the military leadership and led to the appointment of Christopher Miller as the acting secretary. So Miller announced on November 17th the drawdown of troops from 4,500 to 2,500 U.S. service members in Afghanistan and he also announced the drawdown from 3,000 to 2,500 in Iraq.

So the non-U.S. allies in Afghanistan, especially Germany in the north and Italy which is deployed in the western Herat Province bordering Iran, decided to remain. Indeed the German government warned U.S. administrators that the plan partial withdrawal of American troops risked putting peace and progress in the country in danger. So here you can see the German foreign ministry spokesperson Christopher Burger stating that premature withdrawal could jeopardize the negotiation process, the two-sided one between the Afghan government and the Taliban, and jeopardize the progress achieved so far in Afghanistan. So that was a strong statement, but once Biden decided to get out of Afghanistan, Germany followed its lead. At its peak the German mission included 5,000 German troops and now a total of nearly 1,100 German soldiers are being withdrawn from Afghanistan by September. Italy had sent over 4,000 troops to fight against terrorism since 2009. Italy it seems has 895 that will be deployed that will be pulled out and part of the concern there relates to Iran's alleged support to the Taliban. So that meant that NATO saw sustaining the Italian deployment as important. The missions in the United States and in the missions in Afghanistan and Iraq are receiving very scant attention. Um, the United States also has about 700 troops in Somalia and and they are and they were seen as important cornerstones of global efforts to combat terrorism. So a global pullback some argue means that future U.S. administrations, Democratic or Republican, could enter office burdened by unsolvable problems that are exacerbated by overhasty and irresponsible decision making right now.

Thank you. So here you can see the the very pivotal April 2021 uh decision on April 14th and here you can see the United States announcing and the allies, the foreign ministers and the defense ministers that consulted by Zoom um or and following a meeting with the U.S. Secretary of Defense and the U.S. Secretary of State and they announced that all troops would vacate Afghanistan before September 11th, before the 20th anniversary of the terrorist attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon. So the U.S. withdrawal was portrayed by the U.S. Secretary of State Antony Blinken as an accomplishment of America's goals. However, those goals were from the outset ambiguous and now their clarity is lost in the in the annals of time. What we do know and what is certain is that President Joe Biden was insistent that U.S. troops would completely withdraw from the quagmire, meaning from the muddy mess, and the NATO allies immediately followed the United States hegemon's lead. So I'm using that word hegemon to describe the U.S. hegemony for this sudden decision. Here you can see NATO Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg on that day saying, "our drawdown will be orderly, coordinated and deliberate," adding that "we are united in leaving together," which is putting a bold and a brave face on the decision.

So is this a new chapter? The news the uh Blinken went straight the next day to Afghanistan and met with the Afghanistan government signaling a new chapter in the country's relationship, but that news was relegated to the margins of the world's newspapers because of the prospect of a different brewing war in Central Europe and this is over and in the context of Russia's mounting troop deployment next to Ukraine and NATO exercises in Ukraine and Ukraine's fears that Russia could potentially store nuclear weapons in Crimea. So the allies, France and NATO ally Germany, turned to that crisis. Ukraine is not a NATO ally but they turn to urge Russia to withdraw its troops at the Ukraine border. So everyone focused on that crisis and Afghanistan fell by the wayside.

Thank you. We have to look at the fact that the United States is war-weary, their coffers are bare after military expenditures of nearly one trillion dollars on on Iraq and on Afghanistan and another 44 billion on reconstruction projects that may in the future—we don't know what will happen if the Taliban uh take over—but certainly the United States is facing unprecedented catastrophic costs from COVID-related health concerns. So who could really blame President Biden for wanting to get out of Afghanistan after 20 tumultuous and very painful years? So here's some pictures taken from Saki from the war front and you can see that they're preparing night vision goggles and carrying things and preparing their weapons. The United States has endured thousands of combat-related deaths and PTSD injuries and the cost for 970,000 Iraq and Afghanistan veterans' disability claims is going to become much larger over time, exponentially larger. Meanwhile, in the Afghanistan's president's presidential palace, here's President Ghani pinktured here. He seems to be holed up in the palace seeking or seeing junior aides who allow him to think that completing a second term would somehow cement his legacy. And we also can't forget former President Hamid Karzai who is waiting in the wings in the hope that a transfer of power will lead to a sea change in Afghanistan's fortunes. So here you can see a picture that Saki took of the troops.

Because the moving chess pieces will not change the fundamentals of Afghanistan's strategic situation. It's caught in these vast planes, mountains, among moving war-men intent on grabbing resources and usurping the authority such that, in my view, the Taliban's sons will be replaced by their grandsons raised in a culture of war and unable to countenance even the prospect of any kinds of concessions. The women in Afghanistan—it is widely feared that women and girls will suffer the most from gender inequality. They already do, especially in the rural areas outside the cities of Kabul and Kandahar. Global Affairs did a survey and reported that 51% of Afghan women reported lifetime physical and sexual intimate partner violence. The rate of child marriage was 35%. Unbelievable. And over 70% of females 15 and older are illiterate, they cannot read. That is compared to 44% of males, shockingly high. Canada has a 99% literacy rate.

So what are some solutions? We're not going to hear much from the women and children in Afghanistan again as the Taliban captures more ground from the Afghan National Defense and Security Forces (ANDSF) because they're commanded by old men pinktured here who have given up any prospect of winning. It will be left up to the next generation, probably three generations from now, to agree upon some kind of solutions that involve disarmament, some kind of arms verification and monitoring, local and also international multilateral negotiations. There will also have to be some kind of enforcement and a legislative end to indiscriminate bombing and there has to be among all sides renewed openness to electoral power sharing as well as elements of Taliban ideology will have to be mixed somehow with secular principles. All these related pillars of security in my view could collapse around shackled and abandoned in a country with the world's lowest per capita GDP and some of the world's lowest literacy ratings. So RSM was committed to training and funding the Afghan Security Forces and it might have stayed with the conditions-based approach, but in the end once President Biden rejected such thinking, you can see here at the press conference the preferred entire Alliance option became total withdrawal.

Hopeless and yet from the very beginning the entire enterprise was doomed to failure because Al-Qaeda and its nefarious cells can jump from one desperate countryside in Afghanistan to Somalia to Mali to another conflicted area. So the best way to defeat Al-Qaeda back in 2001 would have been to set up counter-intelligence spying and secret surveillance systems. That's my view. And according to U.S. intelligence officials that is still possible, indeed easier after building a network of informers and spies in Afghanistan for the last 20 years. Nevertheless for the Pentagon and the intelligence community, a key debate right now is whether counter-terrorism operations can be maintained from outside Afghanistan. For Americans worried about the threat of terrorism emanating from Afghanistan, when you look at the actual statistics, COVID-related deaths, car crashes and suicide are far more significant causes of death. However, it is sad to contemplate the impact on Afghans once the United States and NATO entirely withdraw and I think we could see an increasing stream of Afghans and civilians trying to get to the international airport as it is closed and so this will be reminiscent of Saigon in 1975 before it fell to the North Vietnamese Army.

I've invited some other speakers on Afghanistan, Rory O'Connor also a former graduate student of mine who uh ended up—can you can you stop the uh Federal Public Service? You can stop now, um, yeah you can stop thank you. Um, so I want to now turn to uh Dr. Nampour who I see has been writing notes and I'm hoping that uh he can respond or can speak to us now, thank you.

Well thank you Erica, am I audible? I'm sorry if my internet connection it could be a little spotty I'm talking to you all the way from Kandahar Airfield. Um well it's great to be here. Um as we understand the Security Sector Reform process in Afghanistan has been a long journey, something that was hailed as a panacea for emerging democratic countries such as Afghanistan. Very many tribulations, very many challenges still exist uh the complexities are only being compounded with the withdrawal of NATO forces and the U.S. forces from Afghanistan. So there's a few things that I want to touch upon, Dr. Simpson has touched upon some very important and interesting facts so I want to start about what state are we in currently. Currently in Afghanistan we're in the transformative phase, so this is the time where we're actually actively working on decentralization of security apparatuses, meaning giving a lot of local police militia such as the Afghan Local Police, District Police and police commanders in different provinces all across Afghanistan, namely the 34 provinces that we have, a greater autonomy to listen to people uh to understand what is really needed in these districts. Our issue currently is that with the withdrawal of U.S. forces, yes we do control the major urban centers in Afghanistan but we cannot get to the districts. The rural districts for the most part are totally controlled by the Taliban. We are on the front lines with them, but the problem is that we do not have the air superiority that we enjoyed for the past 20 years uh the Afghan Air Force is gravely under-equipped, underfunded and very minuscule compared to the uh might of the U.S. forces when they were providing us with full support.

Um so in essence we're taking this approach of the second generation of SSR. So just to kind of highlight over it, the second generation of Security Sector Reform essentially instead of just having a rigid and concrete form of policy to push government policy from top-down, we kind of are taking the bottom-up approach where we are involving community activists, grassroots movements, civil society in our decision-making process. We are trying to see exactly what is needed to improve security outcomes in areas under our control. And this is something new, it will take time, and especially with the withdrawal of U.S. forces right now this issue is only getting more and more complex. Um the capabilities of the Afghan National Defense and Security Forces, we are very capable in terms of defending the territory that we do have. I know right now all over you know social media or global news networks and outlets they're talking about the potential fall of the Kabul Administration uh one thing we can assure them that Kabul Administration will not fall. We are very much able to defend our provinces and our capital city and make and ensure the security of our diplomatic staffs. We have very many great security arrangements in place.

Um in my capacity as advisor until a couple weeks ago we had set up some very many um robust plans which included the interception of threats and how to uh make sure the metropolis of Kabul where over six and a half million people call it their home that it is secure from very many uh security threats. Of course as you can see a lot of cowardly attacks do take place all across Afghanistan especially in the Kabul, you know what we call soft targets targeting children targeting schools and this is something that goes against every single human value uh all across the world. So that is one thing that we're talking about, the fall of the administration is not imminent and it will not fall. Will there be complexities in the peace negotiations that are currently going on with Taliban? Absolutely. Our position in the government is that these peace negotiations went a little—essentially it's a stalling tactic until the United States withdraws, until the Taliban um draws upon their full capabilities to launch a full-scale civil war against us. Um there's very many foreign intelligence agencies which are involved, we have credible intelligence day in day out where we do see who's supporting them. The solution to Afghanistan for a large part does lie in Pakistan and Pakistan is a unique case because we see in other countries where a state has a military, in Afghanistan we have a state, we have the Afghan National Security Forces. Pakistan is a unique case because the government essentially wields no power over the military and in Pakistan the military has a state where you see them controlling all aspects of foreign policy, all aspects of uh their intelligence gathering techniques and their influence is quite vast.

So as such any solution to the conflict in Afghanistan and to improve our Security Sector Reform agenda essentially needs Pakistan's partnership. How sincere is their approach? We do not know. When they wanted to have two professors released from captivity, it did not take them long to have them released. Once the Pakistani government that was reached out to the military and the Taliban released them in a matter of couple days, so we do know that they wield considerable influence over them. So the Peace and Reconciliation process that I've been talking about, it is very much in our opinion still a stalling tactic. The red line for the Afghan government, our position is that we will not acquiesce to the Taliban and sacrifice the hard-earned rights that we have earned for women, for children, access to education, democratic reform. Um the electoral process, we will not go back to the Stone Ages again and we will not let presidents and dignitaries be dragged on the streets of Kabul and hung by a pole for the public to watch. This will not happen again and we will not allow that.

Um the outlook as of now, given the current security situation, is that we expect to have a stalemate. Um and and there's a reason why I say that. The United States, they're withdrawing. We have 352,000 security forces under our command and we're very capable of protecting the areas that we do have, but we lack the logistical support, we lack the reconnaissance support. And it's like the NATO and the U.S., we're very grateful to them for what they have supported us for over the past 21 years but it feels as if we're all of a sudden abandoned in the middle of this conflict where it's only getting worse. And this is not—and this is probably in the past 21 years this is the worst point of the conflict. In the past 21 years there hasn't been a single point in time where the conflict was worse than what it is today and we're being abandoned at a time where we definitely do need the international support. But we are again, we're ready for all eventualities, uh we had prepared for this and again we do appreciate their political, moral and financial support but the capacity building and combat support on the field is something that money can't buy and it's something that political support and rhetorical rhetoric can't be changed.

So as of now our position is very much that we will be in a stalemate. Our aim is for the next—for this fighting season which is going to be starting later this month, which the Taliban usually they release a media uh release that they have started off their fighting season. Our goal is to prevent most of these attacks and perhaps push them to their districts, but it is proving difficult. It has proven to be something where we see a lot of foreign fighters who are infiltrating Afghanistan right now. We have credible intelligence that there are plans to bring in a lot of foreign fighters once the United States leaves and that is going to be facilitated through the borders of Pakistan and Iran. And how we intercept them and how we prevent Al-Qaeda from taking a foothold on Afghan territory is another challenge that we're going to be dealing with. Um so as of now, the Security Sector Reform has taken on this image where it actually comes down to what have we accomplished over the past 21 years or 20 and a half years? And this will be borne out by evidence and the performance of Afghan troops. And what we are expecting is that the morale and the discipline of the security institutions will hold. We will make sure there are elections again, we will make sure that the access to education, women's rights and all these other democratic successes which we have had, such as having all these institutions access to these institutions—um but these positive values will remain and prevail for years to come.

But and in spite of all this, you know, kind of uh government release that I'm telling you about and you know I do not mean to sound like a government mouthpiece who's extremely optimistic, I'm also kind of pointing out the challenges that we do have. And the challenges we do have will be something that will be witnessed in the field and in our opinion the United States will have no choice but to re-engage Afghanistan. They will have no choice to re-engage because if they want to prevent Al-Qaeda from taking a foothold again, they do need to vigorously support us until they either come to a negotiating table with complete honesty and sincerity or they acquiesce and disarm, demobilize and reintegrate into the Afghan society. I'm going to stop right here and allow for any questions and I know time is short so Dr. Simpson I hope I didn't go above what was allocated to me so I'll be happy to answer any questions at this point in time.

Well thank you very much Saki. Uh that was a very interesting and also a bit discouraging. Um because I know you so well and and you are not your normal optimistic self. Um now Saki has a very senior position, a different position now in the Afghanistan government. uh Benoit, who's here on the uh in the gallery, was in Afghanistan as part of the RCMP uh for three weeks and at that time he traveled in an armored personnel carrier and had some security guards. Saki has his own armored personnel carrier and just for the students here, how many security guards do you have now Saki?

Well it's tough to keep count, usually I have about uh 30, 30 uh personal bodyguards with me.

And and he travels in an armored personal car everywhere. Um I don't see any questions but if you do have a question just uh unmute yourself please and then and put up your hand which you do by pressing reactions or just physically like Dr. Dorn has done. Please just put up your hand. So I saw Dr. Dorn first coming in from uh BC from Squamish.

Yeah thanks Erica and thanks for two great presentations. Um I want to focus on the peace process and explore that a little bit with you. Um it's first of all looking at the past, but now we can learn some lessons from the 20 years plus. The um the peace process seemed to be really a secondary thought for most of those 20 years and I think we lost an opportunity—and I would like to be corrected if um if you have different views—that we missed opportunities to be peace-process centric and to do legitimate negotiations when the um when the NATO and government forces were were really strong. So even even in the early 2000s uh we didn't—the attitude was "we don't negotiate with terrorists" and then during the U.S. Obama surge uh it was "well let's uh let's uh first of all win on the battlefield and then we'll talk about peace." So there really were missed opportunities. So first of all comment on the past of peace processes. The present, uh Saki has already said that it's um it's like a holding—they're just um using the peace process to stall while they're arming and and ready to attack. But I do want to explore um the notion that there's still a future for a peace process, I mean maybe after more deadly conflict, um but that there might be also possibility for peace process at a local level. That is, you know, "Talibanism" is not monolithic. That was another big mistake during the 20 years, to view the Taliban as one force; it's actually so many different groups with different supporters. It's not just the question, it's it's so many different aspects. So what about local peace processes? So I guess my question is, you know, for the Canadian Peace Research Association, what's the prospect, what are the lessons about the peace process and what are the prospects for the future?

Can I just say one thing Saki? You can take your time because there are no other questions right now, so—and if you don't mind could you comment a little bit on the role of um Dr. Paolo Cotta-Ramusino please, in terms of behind-the-scenes negotiations and a peace process there?

Right. Um, I'm going to answer uh Dr. Dorn's question first and I'll touch upon that. Um, the peace process at the local level, Dorn, it has to be a community-led, very grassroots type of movement. Now how much effect does a local level peace process with the Taliban lead to a cessation of violence and hostilities with the Afghan National Security Forces? I think those are two questions that there's just not enough time to answer that here. But what I would like to say is that having peace with at the district level is a lot different than having peace with the legitimate government of Afghanistan. Um so the peace process essentially if it has to—if we need to accept peace in exchange for sacrificing the democratic uh achievements we have had over 20 and a half years, for us that's not a peace process, that's acquiescing to the Taliban's demands. We're not going to an ultra-conservative Islamist government again which was only there to support you know which essentially existed as a proxy of other foreign intelligence agencies, which I'm not at liberty to discuss here. But the local peace process Dr. Dorn, I I would just like to touch upon this, you're absolutely right there could be peace at the local level but but that doesn't necessarily mean peace with the legitimate government of Afghanistan. There could be cessation of hostilities but at the same time that does not help with the administration of the government itself.

Um okay. Uh we do have a question from an RCMP officer. Now Saki's thesis also dealt with the police, not just the Afghanistan National Army, and so uh we have a question from Benoit. Did you want to unmute yourself?

Yeah thank you uh. Dr. Nampour, a general question. I had a colleague, an RCMP officer who was the contingent commander in Kabul for one year and he wrote a book about "A Cop in Kabul" and his premise in his book was that the frustration was that sometimes the military had a lot of influence over police training. I just would like to uh listen to your opinion on that or general comments.

Yes, uh thank you for that Benoit. You're absolutely right and in my thesis uh I discussed this extensively on—it's fresh in my mind because I only defended last year. Um the issue as we have known this, and it is very well known in the Security Sector Reform community, is that the para-militarization of the police has been a significant problem. Where community civilian policing has been needed, we have trained our police to fight counter-terrorism, we have trained our police to prevent terrorism, we have trained them to go after insurgents, and nowhere in the world do you see this as an exclusive task of local police forces. So our police are very much lacking in community civilian policing. Uh, it has made it very difficult to build a positive relationship from the very populace they're trying to uh enforce the law upon. And what's happening is that you're seeing a backlash against, you know, police conduct and we see a heightened level of corruption, mistrust, uh questioning the legitimacy of the Ministry of Interior's entire purpose. So we do see this on the daily.

I I just wanted to mention um Saki that Dr. Cotta-Ramusino is in the hospital um again, so he wasn't able to come this morning.

Yes, so I just wanted to mention uh um, well I I call him Paolo, but Dr. Cotta-Ramusino, he's a very, very influential figure here in Afghanistan. He's extremely well-liked in the Afghan circles. Um he's very well-respected here in Afghanistan, believe it or not. He's had a lot of success bringing Taliban leaders right to the negotiating table when the entire international community had given up. So he has—he's an extremely influential figure and uh I've seen this firsthand. He knows the President personally, he knows my boss, my former boss personally. And um back in 2008 when the peace—on this idea of a peace process and reconciliation was coming up, it was actually Paolo who reached out to the Taliban and had these uh secret meetings between himself, the Taliban representatives and Afghan government representatives. So he's had a monumental role in kick-starting the peace process and uh we would like to welcome him someday to Afghanistan, uh like he's come here before and uh it'd be great to uh hear from him in the near future and hopefully if everything goes well we'll see him in November.

Okay well we only have a minute left and so I want to deeply thank uh Saki for coming in from Afghanistan. It's eight o'clock in the evening there and uh we really very much appreciate that you were able to appear on Zoom, Saki. Um and I I I I really appreciate seeing you and I want to just say that uh please stay safe. I know you're not coming back to Canada for a very, very long time and um I just, I'm Frank—I'm his supervisor, I pray for you every day and I hope that you'll be okay.

Well thank you so much! Thank you to all the participants. Erica, thank you for having me and it's been an absolute pleasure talking to each and every one of you and hopefully uh I'll be back sooner or a little later for a visit and uh we'd like to welcome you all to Afghanistan one day once hopefully the security situation improves. We would love to have you all on board. Um thank you so much again and uh God bless you all.

Yeah thank you, thank you. Okay um the networking lounge is open if you want to go there. I'm the chair but I won't be going there because I just have to get the next two sessions going. Um I I encourage you to come to our further sessions and I'm glad to see such a large audience. And I don't think Saki, he's not going to be at the networking lounge but if you want to go there... so how do you get there? Um I'm going to turn to um anyone here who's been a—Yearn, can you just explain to everyone, I guess you go back to the lounge and then... or can you explain to everyone? I haven't had a chance to get there.

Yeah so you go um back to the greeting table and once you're on the greeting table on the left-hand side there's the options under Program/Auditorium, there's a Networking Lounge link. If you click that you'll be able to get into the chat there. Um I think there's also, yeah, there's the Zoom, it says here if you click that link there it'll take you right to the Zoom.

Yeah and there's various breakout rooms so you have to choose the right one. So in the chat it says "please do so in the networking lounge," you're going to the main networking lounge so you would open that link in a new uh tab and then you would go there. Um and then let me just mention we're having another important uh peacekeeping uh and UNIPS and uh the role of the police with Benoit and Dr. Peter Langille, so that will be today as well. So we're going to have a very great day I think in terms of learning more about peacekeeping. Thank you very much and I'm going to say goodbye and take care and thank you.
### Transcript 4D

Welcome to the first part of our lecture on Canada's peacekeeping tradition: War Fighters or Peacekeepers? Question mark. What we're talking about here is U.N. peacekeeping. First, the tradition of U.N. peacekeeping and definitions of peacekeeping, then we go on to talk about multi-dimensional operations including the concept of peacekeeping training. We focus on Canada's peace support operations, another word for peacekeeping, and then we begin to discuss Afghanistan which we will consider in in much more detail in the other lectures. I talk a little bit about Latvia but mainly that's in the NATO lecture, and Mali—Canada has withdrawn from Mali and we also try to do a in-class exercise on Mali that I talk about.

So Canada's peacekeeping tradition stretches back all the way to Lester B. Pearson, who's pictured there receiving the Nobel Peace Prize in 1957. We also shared the Nobel Peace Prize in 1988 because of our contributions to peacekeeping. In 1992—that's the statue at the close to the National Gallery in Ottawa and I was involved in deciding on the selection of the peacekeepers there and some of the debates. In '94 I was involved with the Canadian Institute for Strategic Studies efforts to establish a peacekeeping training center in Sydney—I wasn't involved in that part but I was involved in the Cornwallis one. And then it goes on there, you can see that the back of the Canadian dollar has the same statues. And then when you meet people in the Canadian Forces, they may be carrying ribbons that denote various operations. The back of the Canadian dollar also had as peacekeepers... I've been on radio and debated with Major General Lewis MacKenzie, I've met many times Roméo Dallaire and had dinner with him and talked about the Rwanda genocide and of course there's a movie you can watch, "Shake Hands with the Devil" as well. So Canada has a rich peacekeeping tradition and many, many symbols of our involvement.

What is peacekeeping? Uh here's the UN definition which is a bit outmoded because we used to think that you had to have the consent of all the parties to the conflict. So that was difficult in Somalia, that would be very difficult in Ukraine to have all of the consent of all of the parties. But that's one of the arguments that's been made about Ukraine, that we can't have a peacekeeping force because it will be impossible to get the parties, Ukraine and Russia, to agree. I don't think that's true and we'll talk more about how peacekeeping can be used, but that's just a general definition there that I'd like you to read over.

What we're going to talk about first is the evolutionary model of peacekeeping, how peacekeeping has evolved from traditional first generation peacekeeping to the multi-dimensional operations that we see now in Afghanistan and Kosovo. So formally we called uh—we used to use the word peacekeeping, now we say PSO or peacekeep support operations. Uh some people will say peace enforcement. Essentially we're describing the movement from the first generation where peacekeepers were observers and were unarmed all the way to multi-dimensional operations and the insistence on working on administration, government, voting and so on. So expanding and of course becoming much, much more expensive for the United Nations.

So the first type of peacekeeping was demonstrated here in between North and South Korea. I actually saw this area from the Demilitarized Zone in South Korea and that is where the South—the North Koreans killed some peacekeepers with knives and hatchets before everyone's shocked eyes and so this is a picture of the peacekeepers reacting to that slaughter. At that time peacekeepers didn't carry weapons. Their functions were as observers to monitor and to verify with the agreement of all the parties, so they were unarmed soldiers and they were also expected to somehow diplomatically intervene. So was it dangerous? Most of the operations were not really that Canada was involved in initially. So Canada was in Cyprus for over 30 years and often when you meet older folks that were in the reserves or that were in the Canadian Forces they were deployed in Cyprus and they have good memories of that, except for a brief war in 1974 between the Greek Cypriots and the Turks. My friend General Clay Beattie was the Canadian commander in charge of all the U.N. forces during the war and I worked very extensively with him in the 1980s and 1990s and I have very fond memories of him. He would often recount to me the war and and his decision making.

So second generation peacekeeping began to talk about interposing, interpositioning forces between the warring parties and the goal was to keep them separate using peacekeeping forces. The peacekeepers would still be serving in battalions but armed for self-defense only and they would not use particularly heavy army armor but just light weapons. So the classic example of that was the UNEF, the United Nations Emergency Force in the Middle East in 1956, which is where Pearson proposed a UN emergency force and later got the Nobel Prize for his efforts. Okay, here you can see the forces continue to stay on in Suez City and I want you to look at the blue helmets. The UN traditionally—officials or soldiers no matter what country they come from—all wear blue helmets.

So interpositional peacekeeping also entailed separating warring forces so the UN would use all types of light armored vehicles, you can see that they're white here and they're marked by a blue flag and the United Nations words, so they would interpose themselves. United Nations Force in Cyprus is called UNFICYP and it's the principal example of interpositional peacekeeping as it evolved. So it was created initially in 1964 and they drew these green lines to separate the Cypriots and from the Turks. Then the Turks invaded in 1974 and although um UNFICYP is still in operation, it's really seen to be a kind of a static example of interpositional peacekeeping that's gotten really nowhere to figure out what to do with this island is still in operation, yes. And Joe Clark was a UN envoy who was supposed to try to figure out a solution. Who was Joe Clark? He was Canada's prime minister, he was a conservative and once he retired as prime minister he tried to help the United Nations in many ways.

Third type of—third generation of peacekeeping is often called multi-dimensional and it came to dominate. It meant that peacekeeping became much, much more complicated. Remember a student in my classes years ago was actually deployed on this mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea and he recounted how as a military observer his duties it were much more complicated in terms of separating the uh the combatants. So that a new type of peacekeeping force. And what I want to highlight here—but it's not on the exam—is the difference between Cold War peacekeeping and post-Cold War peacekeeping. So Cold War was more interstate, between Eritrea and Ethiopia, between states. And then it gradually moved more to intra-state conflict like Somalia, warlords fighting in Somalia or different um groups fighting within the former Yugoslavia, like Kosovo versus the Serbians. So that's one of the main evolutions and then of course it moved from ceasefires focusing on observing to more multi-dimensional peace agreements. So you don't have to memorize this but it's just a useful table.

The new types of peacekeeping involve naval operations, they involve Air Force operations including drones, and they involve more U.N. negotiations and state-building. These are all parts of multi-dimensional operations now. See on their shoulders how they have the U.N. peacekeeping badges. The multi-dimensional operations involve everything from helping the police to set up lawyers, reconstructions, building schools and so on. Peacekeeping has come to include the protection of strategic sites, even nuclear sites uh bases and so on, these are important too. Multi-dimensional peacekeeping also can involve pre-deployment, for example in Macedonia so as to prevent a conflict. We also now expect Aid to the Civil Authorities, so the problem became that the military and civilian peacekeepers—maybe they were involved in elections or in monitoring—they went from being professional combat-capable soldiers to being soldiers trained as engineers to get rid of landmines or as bureaucrats to set up elections and so on. It became much more complicated and multi-dimensional. For example, U.N. peacekeepers building roads in Cambodia where there were landmines. You can see here that the money that's involved in obtaining all this kind of hardware is difficult too. So many of these specialized tasks require specialized skills and a lot more money. So demobilization, reintegration, police and so on are much more complicated.

I want to sum up by showing that you can become involved as a peacekeeper by volunteering at national and municipal elections. For example, if you volunteer as an observer at the municipal elections coming up then you will have increasing responsibilities and I've known quite a few students who've ended up going to East Timor or going to Africa to Uganda to be part of electoral organization. This is one way that you can become involved. The UN is involved with nation building, for example they helped with the inauguration of the first Namibian president.

Let me now talk about enforcement and peacekeeping. So this is a word for robust peacekeeping which involves much more active and violent aerial and naval enforcement. It can involve protection against snipers, intelligence gathering, monitoring from the skies, rapid reaction forces, drones to conduct surveillance and so on. Generation peacekeeping involved due to many difficult situations in the 1990s. I spoke about Roméo Dallaire pictured there with the beret and his terrible, terrible experience in Rwanda with the genocide. Uh a friend of mine right there pictured, uh he was uh captured hostage, Patrick, in Serbia and he was held there for a few days. The whole world watched him as he was chained to—or he was tied to a a telephone pole as a hostage. So there were many, many difficult situations in the 1990s and robust peacekeeping continued to evolve. So it began to use more more sophisticated helicopters and drones, Griffins, combat uh helicopters on all sides.

The fourth generation peacekeeping used transitional administration so for example it tried to administrate countries. That means that Syria which is a country on its own—we will probably not have a peacekeeping operation there because to administrate Syria—apart from the difficulties of of even getting in there—would mean trying to run an entire government. So there's a picture there in British pounds of where U.S. peacekeepers have been deployed and you can see that most of it is—most of the deployments have been in the Global South. A big step therefore would be to move peacekeeping to actually governing territories during a transitional period and this is very, very difficult and expensive. The goal might be to turn Afghanistan over to become a stable government that's governed by a local election, a democratically elected leadership, but as we will learn in the Afghanistan case study, this comprehensive approach proved to be a complete failure.

So a newer concept that entails less multi-dimensional operations and more modest goals is called Security Sector Reform. Dr. Saki Nampour was one of my PhD students for five years and he wrote an excellent uh thesis on SSR. His argument was that in Afghanistan NATO needs to spend much more on training the police and also the army and also trying to work with the CIA on judicial and legal operations and intelligence collection and trying to use NATO to disarm the general population. So that was SSR. There's other cases of SSR not just Afghanistan, so I put a few examples there where we had the United Nations. We started working toward SSR, so we're still in Kosovo but the other operations have ended. Kosovo is still ongoing, hard to believe, 24 years. U.N. Interim Administration in Kosovo operates under NATO auspices for the U.N., so NATO is in charge of the security there. It is a very complicated operation where they are trying for a fairly small area to administrate many, many things, everything from banking to Law and Order. Other multilateral organizations are also full partners but it's NATO military forces that are keeping the peace or the security there.

I want to mention that the East Timor operation I mentioned before... some students and in fact my colleague Dr. Walter Dorn went there and himself observed people being shoved into a church and burned alive uh because they were um executed that way. He's very powerfully affected by that. Um so East Timor, that operation of SSR essentially failed. Canada's peacekeeping operation in Mali um has also ended. You can see where Mali is there on the map and Canadian Forces joined with the French. They have a very strong anti-insurgent operation in Africa and there was some um questions about whether we should join with France because the extremists that are in Mali had so far not targeted or threatened Canadian interests but it was part of a UN contribution and Canada pulled out of Mali after six months. The Trudeau government was criticized internally, for example within the UN for pulling out, and that affected our quest to obtain a U.N. Security Council seat. The UN diplomats expected that the Defense Minister at that time, hard decision, would commit to Mali; instead they wanted to delay the decision and they argued that they needed to work with the United States and consult the Trump Administration. In the end Canada did commit forces for six months but no Canadian lives were lost. The decision to exit Mali is already forgotten as a peacekeeping support operation.

For the discussion question, I'd like you to think about on your own is whether Canada should have contributed 200 Canadian Forces to the U.N. operation in Mali. Why should we go in? Why should we go out? Maybe we should contribute elsewhere like other countries in Africa or in the Middle East or in Central Asia in Afghanistan. And is this a form of colonialism that Canada is involved in? Let me turn to the fact that Canada became one of the lowest troop contributors to U.N. operations under Prime Minister Harper. So you can see there in 2011 we joined the ranks of other countries like Rwanda, Bangladesh. We had been a huge contributor for many years but we moved down to position number 53 with only 197 U.N. troops committed solely to U.N. operations. That doesn't include Afghanistan. I'll get into that in a minute, why is Afghanistan different?

So critics often cite the United Nations' failure to prevent disasters. They want to talk about: why did the United Nations not help with the Arab Spring? Why did all this wave of revolutions all across the Arab world which was met with crackdowns in Bahrain, Syria, Yemen... why with all these protests did the United Nations fail to help? And this is something that you can think about and talk to others about. Can the United Nations help with violent resistance in the Middle East today? Now know peacekeeping can fail, so that sets a precedent amongst oppressive regimes all around the world that might say, "oh well we can oppress people without consequences, the UN is never going to come in here and do anything, the UN's powerless." So what can be done? So these are some of the critics' criticisms.

Another criticism is that peacekeepers become part of the problem because of uh rape and because of sexual exploitation of local populations. So there's been a lot of research on trafficking and the spread of HIV/AIDS due to peacekeepers. For example, there was a big U.N. inquiry in 2005 that found U.N. peacekeepers in the Democratic Republic of Congo were sexually abusing girls as young as 13 and there's also been allegations that the U.N. personnel abused children in Southern Sudan. So I'm bringing that up, that that is part of the problem as well. So this leads to no correct answers to this, but do you think that the United States and Canada should continue to contribute more forces to the United Nations and/or NATO? So maybe should we contribute rapid reaction forces in Ukraine? Should we think about going back into Afghanistan? What about Libya, was that a colonial experiment? What about Mali, should we become involved in more countries in Africa? This is a very complex question to answer and I don't want you to worry if you have no idea what to answer right now because you need to hear more in the in the rest of these modules. So here I put a picture of Trudeau here, he's meeting with forces in Latvia. Should Canada contribute to Iraq, to Latvia? We'll talk about this more in future weeks.
