Hello everyone. I am very delighted to introduce to you Dr. Walter Dorne, who is a wonderful professor at the Canadian Forces College and at the Royal Military College. As I mentioned in my lecture, he has appeared very often on CTV and CBC. You may have seen him or heard him on CBC Radio. He is a noted, world-renowned peacekeeper, and he has a PhD from the University of Toronto in chemistry. He also knows a lot about chemical weapons and peacekeeping training. I am delighted that he has come to speak to us about the evolution of international institutions. Thank you, Walter, for coming.

Erica, thank you so much. I really appreciate being with you and with your students. I am delighted to work with you over the years, and now to present and share. I am going to speak about the evolution of international organization, because in our current day we see that international organizations are under siege. You have US president Donald Trump who has withdrawn from the World Health Organization just after a major pandemic struck the Earth. You also have withdrawing from major UN institutions, like the institution that helps gazin at a time of their desperate need. We have all kinds of challenges even to international law, including trade law, like the threat of trade tariffs, which can be challenged in the World Trade Organization. The United States is not even abiding by the World Trade Organization rulings.

So we have to look at how we got to this place where we are now, and realize that this is actually behavior that was typical of 100 to 200 years ago. This is normal behavior of humanity. Then we say, well, how did we create all these institutions that we take for granted? I am going to do a quick historical overview to show the evolution of international organization.

Wow, that is great.

I will do so very much in the Simpson fashion, with lots of slides, lots of eye candy to share, so you can get the visual dimension to go along with the content.

Thank you, Walter.

You are very welcome. This is our planet, Planet Earth. This particular image is called Blue Marble. We are floating in outer space, and we seem to be a pretty amazing planet if you look at it from outer space. All the astronauts seem to come back with a different realization of our common humanity, having seen the world as a whole and from outer space. We realize that it is actually a beautiful planet with a very thin atmosphere that is very vulnerable. It is only 1% of the diameter of the Earth. It is a very vulnerable atmosphere, but we rely on it for our very existence.

If you look more carefully, you see there are so many global challenges. We have aggression and conflict, weapons of mass destruction and mass murder. We have diseases and climate, huge climate changes, climate change problems, crime and terrorism, human trafficking, cyber threats, and so much more. This peaceful planet is actually filled with problems. You might ask yourself: How do the inhabitants of this planet deal with these problems? What is the best that they are doing to deal with these things?

To see that, you have to look at how international organization has evolved. I will start off with the first cataclysmic world war, World War I. There was a clash of empires, where countries felt that they could rule other areas of the Earth and their colonies. They were challenging each other, fighting over colonies, and they came to a major catastrophic war. Some 15 million were killed in that war. Afterwards there was an idea that maybe we can do things better. We do not have to have the right of conquest, and we cannot have governance without the consent of the governed.

This was the origin of international organization for peace. It came in the Paris Peace Conference of 1919, and it came out of Woodrow Wilson, the US president, who at the time thought the Europeans really have to do things differently if they are going to survive, and if the world is going to survive. He came up with 14 points, the last of which was to create what he called a general association of nations that must be formed under specific covenants, with the purpose of affording mutual guarantees of political independence and territorial integrity to great and small states alike.

You see the notion there that others should have political independence and territorial integrity, that you cannot just go and acquire another territory because you want to, like Russia is doing now over Ukraine. It is a blatant violation of international law as it has been developed. This principle is fairly new. It is 100 plus a few years old, and we really have to fight for it.

In the 1919 Paris Peace Conference, Woodrow Wilson wanted to create this international organization, but the British prime minister Lloyd George wanted to maintain the British Empire. The French premier George Closo wanted to have a UN, sorry, a League of Nations force that would be able to beat Germany if Germany attacked again. Wilson wanted a system based not on selfish national interest but on the broad international interest, based on international ideals. We see this debate between narrow-minded nationalism and broad-minded internationalism again and again in human history, and it is facing us once again now. Of course, we have a bigger, better foundation on which to build.

In the great debate of 1919, Woodrow Wilson thought there had to be not a balance of power but one single overwhelming powerful group of nations who shall be the trustee of the peace of the world. Nations have to come together in collective security, not just collective defense against an enemy, but collective security against anyone who would violate international law.

Henry C. Lodge Jr., the chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, thought we should keep the United States out of the League. He wanted America to be much more choosy about when it intervened, and not based on international law. The United States did stay out of the League of Nations for the 15 years that the League existed. Of course, World War II came, and the United States was shaken out of a stupor by the attack on Pearl Harbor in 1941. It joined the nations to fight against Germany and Japan, and then realized we have to do something better than what we did after the First World War. We have got to create a stronger League of Nations, which they called the United Nations.

The properties and principles of the League became incorporated into a better and stronger United Nations, and the headquarters moved from Geneva to New York. The UN managed to do something the League never did. It achieved universality. The 193 members of the UN represent pretty much all the people of the globe. There are hardly any more new nations to join after South Sudan joined in 2011, and then Montenegro before that, and Timor-Leste in 2002. This is a real achievement of bringing human beings together from all around the planet.

What do they get together for? To maintain international peace and security, to have equal rights and self-determination of peoples, to solve international problems, and to harmonize the actions of nations. It is all according to the UN Charter, which also says there is a sovereign equality of all its members. Under the law in Canada, one person does not have more legal rights than another. They have equality under the law. The UN Charter also asks in Article 2, paragraph 4, that states refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force against the political independence or territorial integrity. That again comes right out of Woodrow Wilson’s 14th point. They also agreed, all those 193 nations agreed, to accept and carry out the decisions of the Security Council.

The UN Charter also provides for peaceful settlement of disputes, for negotiation, inquiry, mediation, and referral to courts. It also has an enforcement provision in Chapter 7 of the UN Charter, where nations and the UN can apply sanctions and actually use military force to back international law. But it has a big caveat saying that nations have an inherent right of self-defense when they are under attack, not if they are thinking an attack will come, but if an armed attack occurs, until the Security Council has taken action. There are other chapters for regional organizations and for social and economic progress, because nations realized that part of the problem of the rise of Nazi Germany and Imperial Japan was social and economic conditions after World War I. They realized we had to create an international organization that also dealt with that.

The UN has a General Assembly, a Security Council, an Economic and Social Council, a Trusteeship Council which does not exist anymore, and an International Court of Justice, as well as a Secretariat headed by a UN Secretary-General. A lot of the action, the headquarters is in New York, and the Secretariat is this tall glass building on 1 Avenue. The Secretary-General has his office on the 38th floor. The Security Council meeting is by the East River down on, in this picture here. The Economic and Social Council is on the other side, and the General Assembly is that big building with the dome top that you see there.

The General Assembly has all members, all 193. Each has five representatives, and one country has one vote. You need a two-thirds majority to get a substantive decision, and a simple majority, that is half the votes, in order to get a procedural motion passed, a resolution. They meet in September. Usually the heads of state come for the opening of the new session of the General Assembly. They also have special sessions.

The Security Council: In 1945, the member states who were negotiating in San Francisco, who wanted to join and become part of this organization, agreed very reluctantly that some nations, in fact the most powerful nations at the time, would have a seat on the Security Council. That has been pretty much frozen in time, except for a switch from Kuomintang China to the People’s Republic of China. It is really a reflection of the world order of 1945. Unfortunately they did not create a mechanism by which new states can automatically be part of the Security Council if they rise in power, or other mechanisms for creating Security Council permanent members that are more fair. There are 10 permanent members now, and they come from different regions of the world: Africa, Asia, Eastern Europe, Western Europe, and Latin America. But there are lots of problems. There is lots of politics being played in the Security Council, and Russia has vetoed so many resolutions dealing with Ukraine.

I myself managed to get a little seat for at least a few seconds at the UN Security Council. I took that picture in the year that Canada was trying to get a seat on the Security Council. Unfortunately they did not, but I did.

Joking aside, here is the Economic and Social Council, which Canada does chair now. Bob Rae, our ambassador in the UN, is the chair of the ECOSOC, and it also oversees the specialized agencies and the NGOs now. You may try and guess these. I do not have much time to allow you time to think about what they are, but the first is the International Civil Aviation Organization based in Montreal. Second one is International Labor Organization. Third is International Maritime Organization. You can look at the others and see if any of them you can guess, maybe the UNICEF one, number six, you can guess.

So here they are: the International Telecommunication Union on the second level, UNESCO, United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, UNICEF, Children’s organization, Universal Postal Union, World Health Organization, and World Meteorological Organization, all important in their own areas for dealing with global problems which require global solutions.

More broadly, we have an organization to deal with atomic energy, human rights, refugees, and really importantly now, the World Trade Organization. So if nations are unfairly imposing tariffs, then the World Trade Organization has mechanisms to be able to do hearings on them, and if nations really abide by the WTO, we would be able to solve them.

The UN has agencies, funds, and programs as well. NGOs have expanded very much at the UN. I was just applying for an annual pass today for an NGO representing at the UN, that is the Canadian Pugwash group. There is also the judicial branch, which is the International Court of Justice based in The Hague. The Trusteeship Council no longer has a purpose because all of those territories have gained independence. The UN Secretariat is headed by a Secretary-General, with a Department of Peace Operations that has some 60,000 uniform personnel in different hotspots in the world.

The Secretaries-General have been from different parts of the world. If you look at the list at the top, it is Trig Lee, then comes Sweden, Trig Lee from Norway, then D. Harold from Sweden, Uon from Burma, Kurt Voltime from Austria, AIA Pqu from Peru, Budris Budris Gali from Egypt, Ganan from Ghana, Bony Moon from South Korea, and Antonio Gues from Portugal.

Now, what has the organization achieved? I talk about these long perspective, centuries achievements. The UN has been around for over 75 years. What can you say it has achieved? Number one: decolonization. If you look at when the UN was created, there were so many nations that were colonies, and that decolonization process really sped up in the 1960s. Here you can see the different years when the different nations got their independence.

We also had the adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which is used in many national constitutions, including our own, and it is something that is very widely accepted all around the world through specific covenants that come out of the UDHR, Universal Declaration of Human Rights.

We also have the development of international law dealing with the sea through the UN Convention Law of the Sea, Outer Space Treaty, a whole bunch of disarm treaties that are very important, and we have international criminal law, which just started to evolve after the Nuremberg trials in 1945-46. There was a long pause where we did not have an International Criminal Court until quite recently, created in 2002. We have an international prosecutor who has actually now indicted the president of Russia and the prime minister of Israel. It is a very bold move to challenge power.

There are times when the Security Council played a major role, like the Cuban Missile Crisis of 1962, where the Ambassador Adelay Stevenson would challenge the Russians, and he actually showed pictures of missiles in order to prove to the world that Russia was clandestinely putting missiles into Cuba.

Lots of progress on peacemaking and peacekeeping. Peacekeeping: the first peacekeeping force was created at the initiative of Lester B. Pearson, the Canadian Secretary of State at the time, in 1956 to solve the Suez Crisis. He managed to convince D. Harold that this was a good idea, and then many more peacekeeping missions were created all around the world to deal with hotspots and to help resolve them. That is a way that international presence can be felt on the ground, to have the eyes and ears of the UN there.

Of course there have been difficult situations like Somalia, Rwanda, Bosnia, and General Delaire has described in great detail in his book, Shake Hands with the Devil, how he was facing those who were committing the genocide and killing some 800,000 people. But with just 300 peacekeepers, Delaire was able to save 20,000 to 30,000 lives because they were showing a presence, and the general CS did not want to do their slaughter in front of the UN. There was still an example, even though Rwanda is overall a failure of the international community, the UN was able to do amazing things with a very small force there.

We have the Bosnia situation, and my friend Patrick Reckner was actually chained to an antenna as a human shield against NATO bombing, but subsequently released, and now Bosnia is at peace after several peace operations. I remember when that happened to Patrick, because it was terrible for him.

How long was he chained to that pole?

Well, a few weeks. Well, a few weeks, he was, or days, I cannot remember, but it was terrible for him. Also I just want to emphasize: How many troops did General Romeo Delaire ask for? Only 500 troops, and he got zero. But you were saying that he used 300 to prevent some of the genocide. Originally the UNAMIR force was 5,000. They never quite got it to their authorized strength. Then the Secretary-General sent to the Security Council three options: to reduce the force down to 300, or to increase it to 20,000, or to keep it as is. He said the current, as is, is not working. So the Security Council authorized the strength to go down to just 300, or 250 I think it was. General Delaire, with almost 300 troops, managed to save all those lives.

This is an example, students, of how important it is to remember these numbers, to know the facts. You can see that Dr. Doran has an incredible memory for facts, and even there, recalling what happened in the past, he can remember all this, and that is important. That is why I will quiz you on a lot of these dates, a lot of these times, and also a lot of the pictures, and keep that in mind for the multiple choice. I am looking at it now and thinking, well, what can I do for multiple choice, remembering that the students can remember pretty well everything that you say, Walter. So keep going. This is an excellent lecture. I really, really appreciate it.

Sure. We can make the PowerPoint available so anyone can look at it afterwards.

Oh, okay. That would be great.

This is a plaque at my college, the Canadian Forces College here in Toronto, which shows the names of those who died. It was the graduating class of 99 who gave this to the college, and it is those who served in peacekeeping operations and died in that cause.

We have an expansion of peacekeeping. Originally they were doing just military observers. Then they did buffer zones and armed interposed forces, and then multi-dimensional, where they are doing so many activities, including police monitoring and bringing police into the missions. They did economic and social reconstruction and judicial work. Just a tremendous amount of expansion of peacekeeping tasks.

Here is a graph since 1991 of the number of uniform peacekeepers, that is military and police, deployed to the field. In the Cold War it was typically around 10,000. Then it went to 80,000. Then in the new century it really expanded to get to 108,000. Now, since Trump was elected the first time, it started to go down. You see it is down now to around, well, 60 or 70,000 uniform personnel.

The UN has used enforcement sanctions many times. During the Cold War, only twice, in Rhodesia and South Africa, but afterwards many times. They used military enforcement action. For the first time an international organization used force in Korea in 1950 to repel aggression. Big step forward for humanity.

Now, I have to also, there you have Afghanistan 1999 till now. See, 1999 Afghanistan for sanctions present, those are the sanctions?

Yeah.

Okay. Yeah, yeah. Thank you.

Going on to other areas of progress, there is a huge achievement of humanity bringing hundreds of millions of people out of poverty. Even though humanity has grown from six billion at the turn of this millennium to currently eight billion, there are actually fewer people who are desperately poor. That is really a testament to the effectiveness of our global AIDS strategies, and it is very unfortunate that President Trump has cut off the funding and is firing the employees of the largest aid organization in the world, the USAID, which is Agency for International Development.

Also, eradication. We actually took a disease and took it off of the Earth, so that it could no longer bother humanity again. We would like to do this with other things like polio, but there are still difficulties completely eradicating that.

Going to a conclusion, we have huge humanitarian challenges in different parts of the world today. There is a huge need for international organization to get involved, for peacekeeping forces, and for humanitarian law, IHL, international humanitarian law, to apply to these areas, so we can get proper conduct of military and non-military forces.

But in the UN, we see that it is not able to act as a world government. There are still these competing tendencies between sovereignty and the international rules and norms. There is unilateralism, like the US unilateralism today, versus collective action, working together for a better world. A lot of states put all the emphasis on their rights under international law, but do not put any emphasis on their obligations. That is like Canada. We contribute only 22 military personnel to UN peacekeeping right now, when our average during the Cold War was 10,000 deployed.

Then there is a last principle: power versus principle. So many nations really spend their time thinking about power, realpolitik and realism. They do not think about principle or values or the international rules. We have this huge challenge. It is true that most nations abide by most laws most of the time, but the outliers are so egregious and so obvious that it makes the news every day when these kinds of violations of international law happen.

These challenges that I mentioned at the beginning are global problems. When one nation is attacked by another, it is a problem for all of us, because it is like when one person is murdered, it is a problem for all of us. We have to create international mechanisms to deal with that, just as we do at the national level. We have police to investigate murders. We need the same thing to be done at the international level. All of these areas require strong international organizations.

So the mantra here is that global problems require global solutions. Fortunately we have something to build on. The UN has saved the world so many times from full-blown disasters and conflicts. Otherwise we could very well have seen World War III. But we have been able to keep this precious planet at least in some semblance of condition so most of us can live peacefully most of the time. That is us again on Planet Earth, as we try and make this a better place on which we can all inhabit in peace and under the rule of law. Thank you very much.

Well thank you Walter, Dr. Dorne. That is a wonderful lecture. That is very concise, I think, but also you covered a great deal of information and material. I would love to have an actual live Q&A, but we are at actually 27 minutes, so we are a little over due to my enthusiasm for the points that you are making. I want to thank you. I want to thank the people that are behind you. Romeo Delaire, and I see you have a picture, you have a drone, and you have UN operations, and we are in your actual office. Thank you so much for coming today, and for talking to so many thousand, hundreds of students, including in future years. I hope that I will show this again and again. Thank you so much, Walter, Dr. Dorne, and good luck with everything that you are doing. I am going to stop the recording now, if you do not mind.

Please. Thank you.
