# Transcript 6D

Okay, welcome to uh the 6D quiz and midterm exam information. I'm not using my face on the corner because there's always a lot of uh information that I want to include on each slide. This is my important advice about the quizzes and midterms. It's important to look on the calendar tab for the dates. If you're registered with accessible education, you will get an email confirmation that your extra time has been added. Each student has a certain amount of extra time. It's expressed as a ratio. You will get that email confirmation that you are um with accessible education in that group. If you don't get it and you are with accessible education, then you need to email us. But the chance of that is very low.

Where do you find out the quizzes and the exam times? Look on your calendar tool which is on your tab. You don't look in the course regulations. You don't look in the course rules, the course overview because the uh times can change unexpectedly. We can't predict when exam central will schedule or reschedule an exam. And it it has happened to me that uh OWL collapsed uh once and we had to reschedule the whole exam. Not my fault but OWL collapsed because too many students tried to get online across campus.

So the Senate Review Board SRBA which I served on for nine years or your academic counselor or the vice provost or dean reviews your appeal. That's why I don't put the dates inside the course regulations because then it's appealable. A course appeal is when you challenge a course regulation or decision. It's the regulations that are in those course regulations. I'll tell you right away, if you miss a quiz or exam, your counselor will fail your appeal because there's so many rules that they have everywhere. So, if you sleep in or you drive all night and you miss it, that's not grounds. You'll actually lose that that 40% exam or 10% um quiz which is over 5 days. Okay. So, course regulations required a structured appeal process and the university's academic calendar. The calendar by the university is subject to an appeal. But anyway, to make a long story short, things can change abruptly but not the course regulations. Those are set in stone.

Okay, surprise quiz. Uh we're going to just go through some questions here you haven't studied uh yet perhaps. And here's the question uh from the first uh uh sub-lesson 1a. And the answer here is which one of these questions is not useful to memorize which one? So you read it over um you eliminate the ones you read over the question. You eliminate the ones that are obviously not it. And you guess well it's E. Where were you born? Terrible question to ask anyone. Never, never, ever ask anyone where were you born. Not even a taxi driver. Never do that. It's really impolite and rude. Uh, so the right answer here is E. So the questions come at you. They're they're linear. You can't go back to question one. You have to keep going once you selected the answer. They're linear. So, you haven't taken the quiz.

Here's another one. I always put the lesson that it's from at the beginning. And I think most of the questions just make common sense. The answers are really obvious. Here's one. I mean, you've heard the lecture once. Uh, so you can kind of think about it. So, here, this is key. According to Professor Simpson because in your reality it might be a different answer but in the lecture according to my audio um what was what what is the recommended approach to making conversation? Uh so you read it over and you think about it and um you kind of try to remember what we were talking about so here I think that this is the right answer according to me according to that lecture obviously you might think it's more fun to talk about the Blue Jays, but the lecture said that it was to ask about their ideas.

Okay. If you have problems with a question, you are not allowed to take any screenshots during an exam or a quiz. That's a university policy that I'm required to continually repeat. So, if you send me a screenshot, that is actually something that could get you sent up to the dean's office because it's an academic offense. You took a screenshot during a test or a quiz. Uh what you need to do is write out the problematic question. Students have taken pictures of themselves writing out the problematic question basically. Um or or like take writing the problematic question out handwriting. So I can't read what their handwriting is um here. Why would they be doing that? Because they don't know what the answer is and they think I didn't lecture on it. Now, what I always do is the picture always relates to that lecture slide. I'm not unfair. I don't put unrelated pictures in that would confuse you. So, this picture is exactly from that lecture slide to twig your memory. And then here, what's the major event here? You can read it over. And sometimes there's two answers that seem to be fairly correct, but the lecture said it was B. COVID-19 pandemic.

Okay. So here um another question I'm just generating questions right now. So this is a question that I'm trying to work on. Um so you can see I'm adding nonsensical stuff although it might seem to make sense. Um, and then I'm you have to read my answers pretty carefully. But if you've listened to the lecture once, uh, and you've seen the PowerPoint, then you know that it's B. The correct answer is B.

Now, what you could do is just copy the whole question into chat into the free version, which I did to show you what's happening here. And chat is most of the time very, very correct. In fact, um it's amazing how correct that it is. But then sometimes it hallucinates because it wants to provide you always with a correct answer. So it will give an answer that it thinks is correct even though it's not. I'm I'm finding it interesting. Um so here we put in we into chat and chat says the correct answer is the correct answer. That's the free version.

Okay. So here I I've put the same question into Dr. Google using Ctrl+F. Now, it's hard to do that because I usually have pictures of the questions on the multiple choice. So, you're committing an academic offense. You're also having to retype the question uh because I've taken a picture of it. Not on all of them, but most of them that I think you might try to Ctrl+F on and that's an academic offense. So, here I I put it into Google and of course um Google gave me some different URLs. So, I I got distracted and I'm spending more than two minutes on this question trying to figure it out when I could have just read it, thought about it, and realized that it's B.

So, my warning once again is it is an academic scholastic offense and I insert images of the actual questions to prevent cheating. So, the question is photographed. If you attempt to use Google, you will be forced to retype the question manually. But I'm not really worried about Google at all. I'm worried about chat. And here what I want to mention to you is let's say you have not opened any of the lectures on Brightspace and then you use chat to answer all the questions and you're at home alone and nobody can see you. This someday we will figure out how to catch you and that will be considered an academic offense and you will someday be caught. It might it'll probably not be on my exam because it's too early in the life of ChatGPT but we have a committee and we're figuring out things and basically all I can tell you is you will be expelled from any university in Canada for cheating. If it's continual cheating the SRBA will expel you. And I've been on the SRBA and I've seen that happen. It's it's pretty upsetting. People end up having to leave Canada, their visa, one guy, remembered, had to go back to Saudi Arabia. His family lost all their money and he kept appealing trying to get us to change our minds. And no, he didn't. Anyway, do not risk your academic future.

Remember, I am not trying to trick you. My questions are not trying to trick you. Sometimes students will sit there and they'll go, "Oh, well, is she trying to trick me?" you know, maybe it's not that common sense answer and so on. No, just take your time. Read the question and answers a few times. Eliminate the answers that are obviously incorrect and choose the one that you think in your gut is the right answer.

Now, I want to warn you to protect your notes. If you use um uh Quizlet or you use a um uh notes that you put online, other students may find them to be outdated or incorrect because I update my lectures every every uh term. A lot of the old notes that I look at on Quizlet are amazingly outdated. You know, they might talk about NAFTA or something like that. Once I emailed a student because her notes were so poor and so hastily written that they were misleading students. They were getting lower marks. I was sure of it. So I emailed her and it turned out she was hiking in Nepal and she didn't realize that Quizlet had saved her notes because that's its default. Quizlet takes all the notes and default saves them. So she actually was so upset. I remember she hiked for three days back to a Wi-Fi place and then as soon as she'd removed her note, she emailed me from wherever it was in Nepal. So, do not risk your notes being used by others to cheat and take responsibility for what you share online. The ones that are selling the notes with the questions, I just laugh because there's there's literally 5,000 questions. So, how could you have gotten them? You don't have them.

The quickest way to study is to listen to the lecture one time and then review the slides one time. You don't have to listen to the lecture again, but you should listen to it once. Um now my issue is of course all now the new Brightspace you have to shorten all the lecture titles. I used to have in the question always have the lecture title but now they want only 50 characters which means I have to rewrite everything. I'm not sure I'm going to have time to do that to rewrite the whole thing. But anyway here's a sample question from 1B CA2135 on Canada's foreign policy liberal internationalism. I'm not obligated to put the whole lesson in. I can just put what the name was. What was the primary focus of Lester B. Pearson's Temple University [lecture]? Okay, so this is a bit of a harder challenging question. And so you just read all the answers and then I think on this point um I randomly pushes the the answers are the questions are linear but the answers are also randomized. They're randomized. So what was correct before was C but now what is correct is A. So that means that if someone's writing beside you they they'd say A is correct. Well you don't know what your A is different. Okay.

Now your friends will receive different questions different answers and the question pool is very large. So it is unlikely you will receive the same question twice. It's an academic offense to ask your friend to write the exam again because they got a high score and you didn't study. That's an academic offense and your friend will also be expelled if it is found out that you did that. So let's say your friend took the quiz three times and they took I mean they have literally at that point answered 120 questions. The pools are not large enough um for you not to encounter the or him or her whoever it is that you bribe to do that. Um so it is really a bad idea. Um, you should really try and take the quiz three times because it really helps you to figure out the questions and answers and it helps you to study. It really helps you. That's what it's meant to do. It's meant to help you.

Okay. PowerPoint slides are available including uh one set from the speaker Walter Dorne in lesson six. Let me mention that Brightspace can monitor whether students have opened windows and when. Uh WTS technicians and I can see if you've opened the course site and at what time and what date. Many students have not opened the course yet. Only a few are asking about course regulations like where is the quiz or the exam date in the course regulations. The um answer of course is in the course calendar and the chatbot also tells you uh the dates. Let me mention that I'm not going to be using that. I don't if there's an extra supplementary video I've done on my reasoning for that.

Following the call for the creation of UN peacekeeping force for Rwanda, no countries... So the answer would be zero. Um a lot of the questions uh are easily you can work your way through it if you listen to the lecture one time at high speed or if you've listened to it a couple of times. I think that it the exam is very easy. My best advice is to think it through. You do not need to study every word and concept that we explain. Relax and use your very powerful brain to figure out the right answers. Your best ally is your mind and not your notes. Don't use you're not allowed to use another screen. You're not allowed to go to another device like your phone to use Google or ChatGPT. Your best ally is your own very intelligent brain. So, good luck.

I've given you another example here to think it through. I I really think this is a very easy question. You do not need to study every word and concept that I explained to figure out that the right answer is C. Let me uh show that picture. That student would be committing a scholastic offense in my class. That's because they're consulting another screen and their notes. If you consult another screen during the midterm or the final exam, you have committed a scholastic offense and it will rest on your conscience.

Let me finally add that I have many uh supplementary lectures. I've recently added one on the UN uh one on Brightspace and its limitations uh the problems with how it's measuring. It does not accurately measure time spent on lectures or the use of library tools. I added one on how to travel the world with Dr. Bratt. In short, those supplementary lectures are there for your interest and your enrichment, but they are not on the enrichment, but they are not on the exam. I am not a medical professional. Uh there are also lectures on how to overcome anxiety, fear, how to overcome fear of public speaking, perfectionism, but these are suggestions only and are not examinable.

Finally, um try to quell your brain's anxiety by putting anxiety into a relaxing chair based on the movie. Put a list on your fridge or in your pocket of your favorite activities and call this your extreme self-care list. Every day do at least one thing on your list uh in order to deal with the inevitable anxiety um that that is experienced by everyone. Thank you for listening.
