Canada-US relations during the Biden and the Trump administrations. So you'll probably remember January 6, 2021, when the Capitol Hill insurgents invaded the House of—well, actually the entire Washington, almost—House of Congress and so on, and the military deployed. And the date is called January 6, 2021. So the US Congress immediately resumed the election certification on that date. And although there was this pro-Trump mob, there’s President-elect Joe Biden; he made a speech, very stirring, very lengthy, about domestic terrorists. And then later we heard many assertions by outgoing President Trump that the election had been stolen.

Within a few hours, Twitter locked Trump's account—it has since been reopened—they said that he was inciting violence and Trump would be banned. Obviously, that did not happen. And stunned North Americans then saw firsthand evidence that the US president could be perhaps unhinged—meaning a little bit crazy, irrational, irresponsible. So later he was impeached. And then before he left office—where this is a class in "Canada Abroad"—this guy who was very supportive of Trump back then asked whether Trump could be trusted not to incite further insurrection. So that was a radio show. Everyone—Canadians that heard it—thought that the president's failure to condemn the supporters was a dereliction of his duty to protect the US Constitution.

Still, former President Trump's finger remains on the nuclear trigger now, while literally thousands of intercontinental ballistic missiles are pointing at hundreds of Russian cities and vice versa. So he's now at the apex of power in 2025, and he could still order a nuclear strike on Russia. So the question is: do you think President Trump could order a nuclear strike on Russia? We do not know, but Guy Roberts seemed to think not. As Roberts put it, unless deterrence failed and Russia or China strikes the United States, then the US would retaliate because deterrence had failed. But Guy Roberts has always had a great deal of faith—and you can see that last week in the discussion—he has a great deal of faith in deterrence working.

So we might expect threats from Kim Jong Un, and we talked about that last week—if he thought his power would be usurped or lost. And we have heard his threats to demolish the United States with missiles before. But the opposite argument—and Guy Roberts, remember he recommended that you read *The Day After*, and a lot of people will say, "Oh, you should watch the movie *Dr. Strangelove*" and so on—but really, the nuclear command and control system claims that it has many, many blocks. And you'll hear Tariq Rauf say many processes and procedures that would make sure that it was not made by a single person, a single decision. So it would somehow prevent a lunatic president.

Nevertheless, President Trump has actually undermined deterrence strategy because he presents himself as unreasonable and irrational, and deterrence is based on rationality. Now, other people argue it's based on irrationality; you have to seem insane. Herman Kahn made that argument: for deterrence to succeed, you have to seem irrational. President Trump might have to appear irrational for it to work.

So what is deterrence? I realize that I haven't given you a definition. I put a picture here of Henry Kissinger; he didn't actually have a definition either in his books about deterrence. But just straight from the Oxford dictionary: it's the action of discouraging something through instilling doubt or fear of the consequences. And there's some sentences here where we use deterrence. So Guy Roberts believes in the tenets of deterrence. He talks about "extended deterrence" last week. And then he argues—I think that nuclear deterrence, I argue it has to be perfect or close to perfect, and if it fails, catastrophe will result. Whereas he would argue that we need more deterrence, especially in the cyber warfare world that we're going into.

So moving quickly along—you can study that at your own time—deterrence cannot survive as a credible strategy if we perceive that its executors are irrational and incapable of weighing cost-benefit rationality choices. So this was admirably pointed out by an author from RAND, a famous think tank, where he pointed out—and there's so many books on deterrence, this is just one of them—that it's the perceptions that count. It's those perceptions, not the actual objective conditions, that are important. So perceptions are the dominant variable, as he put it.

So I want you to think about that in the context of President Trump, because it does seem that often he is illogical and more narcissistic and more self-focused. And so the travesty of democracy right now is that we're relying upon deterrence as a credible strategy, and yet it's based on either rationality or irrationality, and it's unclear.

Moving on. So we haven't talked a lot about the new ban treaty, the Prohibition Treaty, or what's called the TPNW—the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons. And our guest speaker this week refers very quickly to the TPNW; he's a very strong advocate of the TPNW in Geneva. And so I asked him to come in. I'll explain who he is in the next two sub-lessons slowly. But the non-nuclear countries are resoundingly—a majority of them at the UN General Assembly—supporting this treaty. So they're asking themselves: what could happen to the globe, to the Earth, if there was a limited nuclear war?

So they bring up examples, not just of India and Pakistan, but of nuclear winter if 100 tactical nuclear weapons were used. And that is just a small, small percentage of the global number of nuclear weapons that we learned about. So the pandemic would be like, as I put here, a "romp in the park" compared to the number of deaths. So you heard Guy Roberts talk about that. And afterwards, after we got off the taping, he actually said to me that he thought a nuclear winter would be good because it would cope with the effects of—sorry, nuclear winter would help to cool down the Earth because of climate change, where the Earth is getting warmer. So we talked about that. There's no evidence either way; no one really knows what would happen, but it was an interesting idea that he didn't put forward on the tape.

So there are the leaders at NATO headquarters, where Guy was the head of the Nuclear Planning Group and all the diplomatic staff there for 10 years. So the NATO allies reject any attempt to delegitimize nuclear deterrence. They are all strong advocates of deterrence. NATO has panned—meaning criticized—absolutely refuses to join the TPNW, and will not even send observers. So only lately have they started to send NATO allies as observers. There's Jens Stoltenberg; he is no longer the Secretary General—he's the former chief, the former Secretary General. He repeatedly warned that the TPNW would undermine global disarming efforts because he argues that the NPT is strong.

So Secretary-General António Guterres said in October 2021 that any use of nuclear weapons would have catastrophic humanitarian consequences. So that's the vocabulary that we use now. Guterres uses, and the UN uses, "catastrophe." And they argue that the new treaty, that the TPNW, is a meaningful commitment toward the elimination, the abolition of nuclear weapons, which they say is the UN's highest priority, the number one priority. So Guterres calls the treaty a tribute to the survivors of nuclear explosions, who are called the Hibakusha. And the Hibakusha who survived the bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki—there's hardly any of them left; they're in their 80s, they would have been around two years old or so, the survivors—and they just got the Nobel Peace Prize last year for their efforts.

Now, the fact of the matter is that the treaty was rejected by the Democrats under Biden, and also under Vice President Harris; she also didn't argue for it during the election. So it's now time, with the onset of the new ban treaty, to reject reliance on the US president. We're seeing that even today in *Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists* articles, that we need to make sure that it's not just the decision of one person like Vladimir Putin or Kim Jong Un or President Trump, because it could lead to the end of the world as we know it.

That was the UN General Assembly, and I'll show you more pictures of that in weeks to come. But here's a picture of the Korean Peninsula, and you can see that I asked Guy Roberts whether there would be an attack on Pyongyang, and he argued that North Korea would be obliterated—the peninsula here at the top—if they were to use nuclear weapons, or if they were to try in a "rogue" attack, like Pearl Harbor, to attack the United States. So that's an important fact for us.

And that brings me into the US Ballistic Missile Defense project. So Guy was very reluctant to go there. I couldn't push him to go into that direction; he wasn't going to move. And so even when we were talking about Kim Jong Un and so on and the threat from Kim Jong Un, he wanted to segue into South Korea being a threat, which took me completely by surprise—to argue that South Korea is a threat. And he usually argues that China is a threat, but he didn't even argue that. So you can see my face as we're going through it; I'm going, "Well, what about the DPRK and, you know, their army, the biggest conventional army in the world, approximately a million men?" Very undernourished, but approximately 10,000 are fighting with Russia along Ukraine. But he didn't go there. Nor did he go into chemical weapons even later, although Sudan is using chemical weapons now.

In fact, he explained to me that a new position under the President Trump administration is that there will be a separate Assistant Secretary of Defense for biological and chemical weapons, and nuclear will stand on its own because it's such a big portfolio. Okay, I'm getting into too much detail, but remember I get excited about these things. I'm passionate about them, I'm very interested, and I hope that my interest will make you more passionate.

So we talked a little bit in Guy Roberts' interview about the possibility of North Korea using their nuclear button. And I always do like to draw attention to the January speech by Kim Jong Un; he tends every year to make this speech and then argue that they can strike the United States. Where would they strike? Around Seattle; they might be getting as close as Seattle now. So we don't know whether President Trump will renew their friendship, but maybe that's something that they can push for.

Okay, what were the tweets in reply to those threats? That's interesting now because we look at that in hindsight and go, "Well, interesting that President Trump said that he had a bigger and larger and more powerful nuclear button, and that his button works," meaning that the modernization worked. I have to move quickly. So there, that's a picture of that incident. And then more threats from Donald Trump. So here he is making threats by Twitter, by tweeting threats like this. and that makes nuclear weapons more usable. And that's what Guy talked about at length. And when we stopped the taping, he went on and on about usable nuclear weapons, how that enhances deterrence. And he talked about the Davy Crockett and the supersonic cruise missiles and how all these nuclear weapons are more usable, and that means deterrence is more credible. Do you get it?

So the Davy Crockett is an old type of nuclear weapon. Then I start talking about nuclear weapons that Canada had: the BOMARCs, we had the Lacrosse and the Honest John, and so on. You don't need to know about that right now. But moving on. So at all times, the US president and the Russian president are accompanied by one single soldier who carries the briefcase with the codes, the nuclear codes. The soldier never leaves the president's side. We don't know about the Russian side.

So that is kind of risky. But that leads to the question going forward, many, many questions about whether Canada should join with the United States in building the Ballistic Missile Defense project. And there have been visits by different people to Canada arguing that we have an obligation to be part of that North American—what's called—Fortress America. So should we continue to participate in NORAD? We are in NORAD; we've committed to it again. We are in NORTHCOM and we are rebuilding the North Warning System. So those are the figurative walls of Fortress America. And then there's the roof. So we have not built that yet; it's not possible yet to build that. And the problem is the amount. So we're going engage in excessive militarization. President Trump is talking about the NATO allies spending 5% of their GDP. Canada doesn't even reach 2%. So 5% would be a significant hike in defense spending for all the NATO allies. And that tab, which might be more than 2%, could rapidly escalate because of the cost of building a Fortress America.

If Canada did decide under the next Prime Minister—which might be Pierre Poilievre, or it might be Chrystia Freeland or Mark Carney, we don't know—might Canadian firms actually benefit from working on that sort of research? It's an interesting question. Most of those firms are in Ottawa. So what do high-level officials say? We need answers, and these are difficult questions. I've invited quite a few people to my classes that are from the United States. I had a visitor, Dr. John Manza, when he was NATO's Assistant Secretary General in charge of all of NATO's operations, visiting Detroit and then visiting my class on the way there. And he argued in the class, in front of the in-person students, that Canada should definitely, definitely participate in the US Space Force and in the Ballistic Missile Defense—which should be spelled with an "s" there from the American perspective, but from our perspective with a "c".

Problematically, in future years, the US missile defense system could establish what's called a preemptive or first-strike-from-space capability, and that would lead to the Chinese and the Russians feeling insecure, and feeling like our finger is on the nuclear trigger, and that will make them more insecure. So Russia has been very vocal about being opposed to a Ballistic Missile Defense system. And the question is whether those interceptors would be up in Alaska or even in Canada's Arctic.

I'm moving fairly quickly, but we have to remember that we have a lot to cover. And then we'll be ending on nuclear proliferation. But I was very pleased that Guy Roberts came into my lectures twice. You heard the second one; if you were in my other classes, you heard the first one. And now you could hear he is more focused on South Korea as a threat, Saudi Arabia proliferation—all the things that I was worried about before, now he's worried about, and he's not so much worried about China. What does Tariq think? I'm going to talk to you about who he is in a minute.

So Guy Roberts strongly believed, when he was in charge of the project, that the United States had to modernize. I was interested because he did talk about the modernization, but he wasn't so worried about Russia modernizing and the Global Partnership Program; he was more worried about the United States. And that brought me to bring in this quote from President Trump before: "Top of the line. Best in the world." So to me, they always want to make a better product, and that's motivating it.

But joining in BMD, Ballistic Missile Defense, could make Canada more insecure. This is a cartoon; there is no such thing that is operable right now. But what would happen is they would somehow intercept incoming ballistic missiles—which no one can intercept right now—and then these errant missiles would explode, and the fallout would mainly fall over Canada because they would be coming over the North Pole, over the Arctic—the Russians or the Iranians, we don't know.

So Quebec—Quebec has a huge amount of land in the north, and Quebec is solidly against Ballistic Missile Defense. That's very, very interesting because they just do not want to participate in this at all. I put a picture of Artistes pour la Paix there, and Pierre Jasmin and other artists who are solidly against Ballistic Missile Defense, and Steve Staples who spoke to my class a couple years ago. I'm not using that lecture anymore.

So to end: Do you think that the Earth's orbit should remain a demilitarized zone? I put the options here, and the right answer is "No right answer," because this is an opinion question. You can't ask these sorts of questions in multiple choice because it's your opinion. It's your opinion. So there's no right answer. That's the "right" answer. I wouldn't put that sort of question in it, but just so you know. Okay, I think we're ending there, and now I want to go on to the next part. Okay.