Welcome to Lesson 3B, which is on the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (the NPT) and the Prohibition Ban Treaty. And we're getting more into issues to do with Ukraine, to do with arms control, to do with our guest speaker. And then that equips us to understand our guest speaker and, hopefully, equips you as a global citizen.

I put a picture of myself there because there's no room for the video. Often I like to put more pictures in; it's more useful for us to have pictures. So, what do I want to say here? In the last lecture, I mentioned that I can't test you on opinion—whether we should have a Fortress America, whether a Space Force is a good idea or not. I can test you on whether people *think* that's a good idea. I can test you on facts and dates. So a lot of students keep a separate list of dates as I'm lecturing and they just memorize them. If you want to serve Canada abroad, or you want to be a global citizen or a student traveler, you do need to think about issues to do with nuclear weapons and the ban treaty.

The Bay of Pigs fiasco was featured by a decision by John F. Kennedy, pictured here. I do often put in pictures of famous diplomats and ask you to identify them, so I don't just ask about the content; I ask you about the pictures as well. He set up an ExComm, which Brightspace does not like. It will frequently change the word "ExComm" here to "X." It just doesn't like it; it will automatically change it to something else. It doesn't understand. Oh, Brightspace. Anyway, he wanted it to guide his decision-making during the Cuban Missile Crisis. The Cuban Missile Crisis happened 60 years ago, more than 60 years ago, and since then we've had a number of other crises.

Let me talk about former US President Joseph Biden. During his reign, he ignored the wise and sage advice of military personnel and military brass on the crisis in Afghanistan, and he actually ignored the advice of his Defense Secretary. So, we are talking to the Assistant Secretary of Defense Guy Roberts, and Biden also ignored Lloyd Austin's advice and then pulled the troops out of Afghanistan by August 30th, 2021. That was contrary to the advice of many diplomats who argued that the United States should undertake a conditions-based negotiation withdrawal when it was a good time in Afghanistan, rather than when it was a time-based decision for the United States. The US wanted to withdraw due to the cost and the numbers of dead and maimed people.

The US Secretary of State then, Antony Blinken, appeared bullish—another word for hawkish—on Russia and Ukraine. For example, he spoke firmly against Russian signals that they would invade at the NATO Foreign Ministers meeting in Riga. I'll show you where Riga is in a minute. That was on December 1st, before the actual February 24th, 2022, invasion.

Recall that Kennedy himself ordered—or encouraged behind the scenes—the ExComm adviser General Maxwell Taylor. I said "recall," but you haven't learned that yet. But he asked him to declare bellicose threats in favor of conducting a nuclear strike in order to see what the ExComm would argue. Meanwhile, behind the scenes, Kennedy's own brother Robert Kennedy—pictured here, or sometimes called Bobby Kennedy; he was also assassinated later, so both Kennedy brothers were assassinated—they counseled enormous restraint: not to preemptively strike Russia, not to undertake a first strike against Russia during the entire crisis.

So 60 years later, the Cuban Missile Crisis is over. and you heard me and Guy Roberts refer to the "nuclear taboo," which is the idea of a normative—meaning a learned—inhibition against the first use of nuclear weapons. The idea is that most states do not want to go down in history as having used nuclear weapons first. The United States so far is the only country in history to use them first, in Hiroshima and Nagasaki. and so we saw the results of it—you didn't, but we've seen it in many pictures and so on. And those new findings suggest the view that even a medium-scale nuclear war would bring about a global nuclear winter, and you heard Guy Roberts refer to that too.

The US decision to deploy intermediate-range nuclear missiles in Europe—so you heard Guy talk about intermediate nuclear weapons. Some people call those "tactical" nuclear weapons, and so the vocabulary is not well defined: what's tactical, what's strategic, and so on. What we do know is that Russian President Vladimir Putin said that these are a great danger and threat to us, and he has claimed that the arms race between Russia and the United States was intensifying.

Now, the Russians talk about Washington's withdrawal from the 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty and the American withdrawal first from the 1987 Open Skies Treaty. The ABM Treaty, which dates back to 1972, was put in place after the Cuban Missile Crisis—so, the Cuban Missile Crisis in 1962 and then the ABM Treaty in 1972. The United States withdrew from both first. The United States was non-compliant before Russia, so Guy Roberts was incorrect. But during the discussion, you saw me be ambiguous. You never correct people publicly on tape—no, actually, never correct people.

Russia finalized its withdrawal from the 1992 Open Skies Treaty on December 18th, 2021. The United States withdrew from it first. President Putin often complained about activity near Russia's borders, and he claimed that Russian forces could closely observe these different Navy command ships. So they were worried about a possible attack by NATO, and the exercises by NATO with different warships concerned them. I bring that up now because we will talk in the future about the Black Sea.

Moving on to Russia's troop buildup near Ukraine. NATO's Secretary-General Jens—which Guy Roberts will say "SecGen"—Stoltenberg stressed before the invasion that there will be a "high price to pay." These are the deterrent threats that they put in place before the Russian aggression, and obviously, that failed. Ukraine is still not one of the NATO allies; they extended invitations for it to be a partner, but Ukraine and Georgia are partners, but they are not allies. At the time, Sweden and Finland had not joined; after the Russian invasion, Sweden and Finland joined NATO. So now there are 32 members of NATO. 32.

I'm moving quickly, covering a lot of time, a lot of things. Here's Riga, Latvia. Here's Latvia, and there's Riga. and they wanted to consider how they would deal with Russia's troop buildup near Ukraine. and they discussed how to deter, but obviously they weren't able to deter. They were very aware that in 2014 Russia annexed—invaded, occupied, and annexed—the Crimean Peninsula here, which was part of and is still part of Ukraine, but it is now annexed by Russia. And so the President of Ukraine—who nobody knew who he was back then, but now we all know who he is—and the Prime Minister of Georgia visited NATO headquarters during the COVID pandemic.

At that time, Canada decided to send more Armed Forces, the Canadian Armed Forces, to what's called Operation REASSURANCE in Central and Eastern Europe in order to deter, to signal Canada's willingness to be part of a collaborative collective defense by NATO. After the meeting in Riga, Blinken and Biden told the world press that the United States would respond to a possible invasion with a range of high-impact economic sanctions. And we're going to have a special guest speaker who helped put in place those sanctions, so that's going to be very exciting. A Foreign Service Officer from the government of Canada has agreed to talk to us about this, and that should be quite interesting. And that is also part of the strengthening of alliance defenses on NATO's eastern flank.

Okay. President Biden and President Putin held a video call—here you can see it from President Putin's perspective—to quell the crisis. Under NATO arrangements at that time, shrouded in secrecy, Guy Roberts does refer obliquely to the tactical nuclear weapons that are owned by and controlled by the United States. They're American nuclear weapons, and they're in five NATO allied countries. There's approximately 150 of them; we don't really know for sure how many there are. And these are dual-capable aircraft, meaning they could deliver conventional or nuclear weapons. And that's another issue.

So under the NATO arrangements, which are still shrouded in secrecy, there's five states: Belgium, Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, and Turkey that host up to—we don't know—150 nuclear weapons. And they may have been moved out of the United Kingdom; maybe they're in Scotland, we're not sure. They're here in Turkey, which some people think is risky, because if Turkey was taken over—these are in a small village in Incirlik—and then there's some in Italy and Germany and the Netherlands.

In May 2023, Russia began deploying tactical nuclear weapons in Belarus. So Belarus is a military dictatorship that is situated north of Ukraine and east of Kaliningrad, which is Russia's Baltic Sea enclave here on the Baltic Sea. During the 1990s, Belarus, along with Kazakhstan (not pictured here) and Ukraine, surrendered their nuclear arsenals to Russia in exchange for security assurances. So you heard Guy Roberts talk about security assurances. They allowed the Russians to pull back their own nuclear weapons back into Russia in exchange for security assurances from Russia, the United States, and the United Kingdom. That's why you'll hear many people are very critical that the United States did not defend Ukraine in the wake of the invasion. Belarus is a military ally, and that is where the Russians are deploying troops. It's a staging ground for Russian forces, and it continues to be so during their northern invasion—they're coming from the north into Ukraine in early 2022.

So where is Kaliningrad in this giant picture? It's interesting: the maps are always red of Russia, and so this is their Russian enclave, Kaliningrad, where they are also deploying tactical nuclear weapons. The secret agreement back in 1962, and the real outcome, was that the United States agreed to withdraw its tactical nuclear weapons—which were called Jupiter missiles—from Turkey. So the United States pulled them out of Turkey in exchange for Russian withdrawal of its tactical nuclear weapons from Cuba. That was the exchange behind the scenes in secret letters between Khrushchev, the Russian Premier, and President Kennedy. Now, with tensions at their worst since 1989-1990, when the Cold War ended 30 years ago—three decades ago—we see that the Russians are threatening, and they have threatened, to deploy nuclear missiles as well.

The Russian incident on the Black Sea in June 2021 led to more tensions. The Russians have been complaining for a long time about NATO exercises on the Black Sea, which they consider to be threatening: the drills, the thousands of troops, dozens of ships. And they do need to have more transparency, more "new thinking" about the Black Sea at NATO headquarters.

Here's Jens Stoltenberg. He was one of NATO's longest-serving leaders since 2014, and his term was extended by two years and then two years during the crisis, and he remained focused on military readiness: increasing defense spending, investing in major equipment, new technology, cyber warfare, outer space. The new Secretary General is Mark Rutte, who is the outgoing Prime Minister of the Netherlands, so he's the former Dutch Prime Minister.

In Washington, both the Republican and the Democratic parties acted in a bipartisan fashion, and you hear Guy Roberts speak about that at length in terms of the amounts of spending that are being put forward by both parties in agreement. The 2022 spending was 768; now it's actually 842 billion dollars. And you hear Guy talk about that—that's, as he puts it, an unfathomable amount of money to be spent per year. So how much is it approximately? Well, he says around 850, but they agreed on 842 billion. I would add that the United States, then, is the most powerful military country on Earth, despite its own decaying infrastructure, its lack of free medical care, and the onslaught of a pandemic that surpassed 1 million total deaths—far more than in Canada, proportionately.

Taken together, the consequences of military escalation over Ukraine are very serious for humankind and for all Earth species, because of the nature of war and technology in this century. Military satellites in space's vulnerable atmospheric zone, combined with complete reliance on military communication by computer, mean that the former Cold War's bipolar system between the United States and Russia is now multipolar and therefore less controllable—quickly uncontrollable. Decisions by third parties, unlike during the Cuban Missile Crisis—here you see Khrushchev and Kennedy meeting together—we don't see that. The problem is that decisions by third parties like China, and the United Kingdom's decision to increase its nuclear warhead stockpile caps, can defy logic. You heard Guy Roberts start to talk about game theory and the need for understanding the Chinese buildup. I can't recall if during the taping he talked about the Chinese buildup, but he heretofore has always been very concerned about Chinese missiles and their buildup back then.

In game theory—traditional game theory—I have not taught that to you and I will not be teaching game theory to this class. But if you took my other classes, we talk about game theory and we talk about new ways to ameliorate the tensions—so, things like letters. But that's all been jettisoned now in favor of digital communication. So we're in a new age, as you know.

And now, I mean, you heard Guy Roberts talk about threats to annihilate. He kept—I couldn't—he kept talking about how we've issued, "we" the United States have issued threats to North Korea and so on. So now threats to annihilate are hurled in seconds using Twitter, and they're not really as newsworthy because they're distributed so widely; people are kind of "déjà vu," they're used to it. Former US Assistant Secretary of Defense Roberts hinted that they are in news releases, phone calls, and in explicit threats delivered by diplomats, including to the press. So that was quite fascinating—a very interesting part of our taping.

Just need to move on. We're at 17 minutes and I need to be done in 20 minutes. Here's Fidel Castro. He was the President of Cuba during the Cuban Missile Crisis and during the Bay of Pigs, and he schemed for weeks that US intelligence, he was worried, would notice the movement. Nowadays, to move even 10,000 soldiers is very visible. We know that there's North Korean soldiers along the Ukraine front, deployed by Russia. Back then, you could secretly do this and the United States couldn't see from space, but now it's impossible. They can see a license plate from space. So that does mean that it's possible that the international community can act quickly. And instead of engaging in weeks of speculation, the international community can quarantine, using for example travel bans, within hours over all sorts of things—including before we quarantined important countries because of the Ebola virus, we have quarantined because of China and Russia over fears of the coronavirus and so on.

We're going to talk about sanctions with Adrien Blanchard, who is a diplomat who helped put those sanctions in place. and we're going to talk about that. But let's just focus for a moment on this date: 2007, the Russians' landmark cyberattack on Estonia, another NATO ally. So they attacked the government and the banking structure. So far, they have not attacked the NATO allies' infrastructure; they've just focused on Ukraine.

Which brings me to North Korea. And Guy Roberts went there, but then he went into South Korea being a threat, which was a "new" threat and surprised me. Normally he would refer to North Korea's attempts to conduct hacking cyber warfare against big companies like Google and Sony, and then he would be worried about Afghanistan. But you heard not a word about Afghanistan from him during the entire taping. And basically, the concern is that emerging cyber warfare capabilities will rapidly complicate the Ukraine military crisis. So let's leave that—and I've got right to 20 minutes here. And there's some pictures of the North Korean cyber warrior soldiers being trained in a secret location in China, and some pictures of the Taliban, which took over Afghanistan and are in charge and are the unrecognized government.