Welcome to 3C or 3.3 on International Security Institutions in Canada. So we're beginning to speak more about the United Nations, NATO, and multilateral institutions.

Let me begin the lecture by a live update from President Trump. And I wanted to insert this because in a way Mr. Trump is beginning to undermine and threaten international institutions. Diplomats around the world are starting to talk about that. And indeed, I'm meeting with Tariq Rauf this afternoon and 19 other diplomats on Zoom hosted by me to talk about these sorts of issues.

The first point to make today is that the concern is that because Mr. Trump is now claiming that he didn't get the Nobel Peace Prize last year for stopping eight wars. He sent a text message—not to the Nobel committee that selects the Nobel Prize, but to Norway's prime minister—and he is stating that he can now, because I guess his ego is bruised, he can now prioritize what is good and proper for the United States of America. So that has implications for international law, and people are talking about whether this means NATO is threatened, how is the UN threatened? We're going to be talking about these issues.

There's also questions about sovereignty and the challenge by—possibly in some sort of technical way or perhaps with an annexation—that there could be a challenge to Denmark's sovereignty and that would cause the disintegration of European institutions. Mr. Trump is questioning Denmark's legal claim to Greenland and saying that there are no written documents. There are written documents, but he seems to be just ignoring all of the documents in the past. Perhaps not reading them and asserting now suddenly—this has never been heard before—that the United States requires complete and total control of the island of Greenland, which is enormous. This message was recently just circulated to European ambassadors in Washington and it was published in many newspapers including the New York Times and Reuters.

Let's just—I'm not expecting us to go through the historical treaties and legal recognition, but here are just some of them. So for example, there is that 2004 US-Denmark Defense Pact that explicitly recognizes Greenland as an equal part of the Kingdom of Denmark. It's still a kingdom. There is also a treaty that goes back to 1916 where the US and Denmark purchased—they sold to each other—the Virgin Islands. So people are asking: does that mean that that treaty doesn't hold anymore? This claim contradicts US treaty commitments in the past.

Denmark is maintaining that it cannot sell Greenland. There's so many resources, so many natural resources, including all sorts of—there's 60,000 people there. Should they determine their own future? They're saying in polls and in marches and in protests, "No, no, no. Go home." The Mr. Vance and so on that are visiting—the vice president is visiting and Stephen Miller—and the president is now starting to talk about increasing the military presence very carefully.

So, the United States and the NATO allies—I'll talk more about NATO in future weeks. Again, we'll return to this, but they're debating about how to increase NATO's presence in Greenland. Right now, Danish forces patrol the area of Nuuk. There's a Danish icebreaker which breaks through the ice and conducts coastal patrols. There were technical talks that were just announced a couple of days ago but no substantive progress. So this is what diplomats are talking about and we're holding a meeting, as I mentioned, this afternoon, including with our guest speaker Dr. Tariq Rauf. So this is another meeting I'm holding just with high-level diplomats.

We're actually going to be meeting—to make a long story short—on January 30th in the government of Canada and the Foreign Affairs as part of some nuclear arms control disarmament talks.

Okay. So I put some slides here about other occupations where technical talks can serve as a precursor to coercive forced escalation. And so we learned about instruments, non-military and military instruments of power. And I asked you to do your own toolbox. Some of the parallels here might be part of your toolbox. Now this is not on the scale of Hitler's in 1938. Not at all. He has not used military force. Nor is it on the scale of Russia's annexation in 2014 of the Crimean Peninsula, which I've talked to you about. And it's not on the scale of the US annexation of Hawaii, which was done against the population's will, and the British occupation of Egypt back in 1882. So although there's a bit of a pattern here of great powers acquiring territory, there are still constraints in place and those are diplomatic, international law, and all the things that Dr. Tariq Rauf will be talking to you about.

Just to conclude here for a few more slides: Canada is, as we speak, considering a small deployment to Greenland as part of a NATO exercise and that would be part of Prime Minister Carney's way of signaling solidarity and the fact that they do not want to escalate this into a war. So Prime Minister Carney is emphasizing support for sovereignty and the territorial integrity of Denmark and Greenland, which is part of it. Multiple European states are already deploying personnel in Greenland, using Arctic-capable drills, and Greenland is being framed as a collective security issue.

It has not reached the UN yet. But I do want to point out to you that Dr. Rauf lives in and works in Geneva, in Switzerland, as part of the United Nations. So this is the gate going into the United Nations in Geneva. There's another part of the United Nations that's also in Vienna.

So I need you to know some terms from his biography. And I've put the highlighter on now, simply because I want to make sure that you recognize some of these words. So he was the director of SIPRI. I'll refer to that, and that is short for the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute. And he's been long involved with that. We always just say SIPRI. He is a recognized authority on nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation issues, and I was very pleased to get him for this class. And this was a recording that I did exactly one year ago. So, I'm not going to eliminate this recording. I think it's still relevant. He was senior advisor on the 2015 Non-Proliferation Treaty review conference. So, I've already said the NPT review conference quite a few times for you and it needs to just roll off your lips. The NPT review conference. Some people will even say the NPT RevCon, and you're supposed to know what that was.

He was also the head of the Verification and Security Policy Coordination Office at the IAEA—the International Atomic Energy Agency, but we always just say IAEA. And he reported to the Director General who later got the Nobel Peace Prize. He also was involved with these verification cases. So you can see these are all very complicated verification cases and he was coordinator. He knows a lot about the nuclear fuel cycle. He was the alternate head of the IAEA delegations to the NPT review conferences from 2003. So he's a very good writer and I've seen him over three decades, 30-35 years now. We've been working together and so I was really pleased that he agreed to come to the class—to a second-year class, although many of you are third or fourth-year—and to help us out a little bit.

So I mentioned to you now I will be going to what's called the Nuclear Arms Control and Disarmament Consultation hosted by Global Affairs Canada (GAC) on January 30th. I'm saying a lot of "ums", but I want you to just hear how the words go together. It's kind of like another language when you're in Foreign Affairs. SIPRI, NACD, NORAD, OSCE, UNIDIR, UNOPS, UNGA—like, we use all those sorts of acronyms. The NPT RevCon is going to take place in 2026, which is also why we're having the discussion this afternoon and on January 30th. So, I'm hosting a discussion by Zoom among diplomats because I want us to be ready for the Global Affairs Canada discussions. It's hard work to learn all these acronyms. It's hard work at the beginning, but it makes life a lot easier if you can just memorize them. Every organization has a different name for the head of the organization. A person might say the Sec-Gen or the Deputy Sec-Gen, the head, the PM, the President—that's their boss.

If you're an expert advisor, I think it's better for your long-term job security to be a generalist rather than an expert. The government of Canada—especially Global Affairs Canada, pronounced GAC, formerly the Department of Foreign Affairs and before that the Department of External Affairs (DEA)—prefers generalists rather than specialists. They want people who know a lot rather than one small area. It's hard work and I think that AI can help you quickly learn a lot really fast. You can make your own multiple-choice questions. You can quiz yourself. You can ask AI, you know, "What is the NPT RevCon?" and here it tells you, tells you all this stuff which, you know, we used to have to go to fact sheets and things. Now, of course it can be wrong but it's often right and I was very impressed. Now Dr. Rauf spoke to us from Italy. Although he works in Geneva at the UN office, he always expects you to listen. No interrupting, and he speaks very, very quickly.

There he is. He's often on—he's what we call a talking head around the world. A person who speaks on behalf of himself or, in this case, SIPRI, and that's his headshot. Headshots are under pressure these days. I'm also what's called a talking head. So, the media will often contact me. I prefer written compared to doing Skype or doing anything on TV. I can't control the outcome that way. And over the years, my tendency has been to write back. So here, just a few minutes ago, is a typical question for a talking head, but it's not typical because of Mr. Trump. So what they're interested in is a piece on a hypothetical American military invasion of Canada, what it might look like and how it might resolve, given my background. That's because I wrote an article in the Globe and Mail on this last June. "I was wondering if you'd be open to it." So I don't like to do the phone interview, students, because they can take out of context what you said. So generally I will write something back to them. Don't use chat. So here's their questions that they want to ask me: "How likely do you believe it is for the US to take military action at this juncture against Canada?" I don't know what might prompt the US to take such measures. Well, they want the Great Lakes. They want the Arctic. I don't know. I am probably not going to respond to this. "How might a military invasion of Canada go?" Wow. That's the Toronto Star. Talking heads are under pressure these days.

Okay. So, let's say you want to use AI to learn the language of international institutions, which I'd like you to learn. You know, I often say the UN, NATO, the WTO; but as you become more specialized you learn more things like the OECD, the OAS, IMF, and so on. So it depends—there's thousands of international institutions. I can't quiz you on all those names you have to figure out, but I do expect you to know the ones here, these ones in yellow. So you must know these for the multiple-choice exam.

For the multiple-choice exam I also expect you to know the World Bank Group. I want you to know the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe. See the hyphen: OSCE. Canada participates in this forum. We are a member of this forum and this is one way we can become involved in European defense, NATO and the OSCE. The Five Eyes intelligence alliance: so these are the United States, the United Kingdom, Australia, New Zealand—so those are all the English-speaking Five Eyes. And then the Arms Trade Treaty, which I will talk to you again about in the future. Canada's a signatory to that treaty and Canada's a signatory to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, which the United States has withdrawn from. Global governance: Canada is part of the International Criminal Court (ICC). Canada is also a part of the International Court of Justice. And then Canada, as I mentioned, is part of the IAEA.

The IAEA—we're a major supporter because we're a nuclear power and we have the second most uranium in the world. We're a major supporter of nuclear safety, security, and non-proliferation initiatives. Which is also why I'm going to Ottawa at the end of January to talk about non-proliferation initiatives. I'll be there for quite a while talking about this. So, I'm not an expert on—this would be Intellectual Property. This is more for people who go into law, if you're interested in intellectual property. CERN—the European Organization for Nuclear Research. So I have found over the years that scientists from Geneva say CERN, they don't say "Kerna". And then the United Nations Development Programme, UNDP. So here AI is telling me, "Do you need any details on specific membership?" Interesting.

Dr. Rauf in his talk speaks about this school. That's where he was at in Italy at the school in February, which is a nice time to be in Italy. And this is the school and he mentions it and I put the website there. I have not attended this school. It is, I'm sure, quite expensive.

Finally, if you do want to become involved, it is best to become involved with the Canadian Volunteer Initiative at the beginning and then go international. So, I'm the president of the Canadian Peace Research Association, which is another institution—international institution based in Canada. And there's our website. And if you're interested in joining, that would be something that you could consider. I hope that—but I'm not pressuring you to do so and it would not change your mark in this class. If you are going to ask me to present because you are trying to apply to med school, my new policy is that I will not allow you to present so that you can fill that part out of the med school application where you can say you did something for a volunteer thing. I'm starting to doubt the motives of students that are asking me to give a presentation and realizing that it's—I mean, I got a few calls this week and people visiting my office hours, and I think it's best to join something like the Cross-Cultural Learner Centre if you're interested in law downtown—work with cross-cultural new immigrants. I don't think working with this association and then trying to get into med school or law is a good idea. But maybe if you're interested in international law...