Students, welcome to lesson 2A, which I've entitled Nuclear Nightmares. We will be talking a lot this week about nuclear weapons, nuclear proliferation, nuke maps, Hiroshima, Nagasaki, and the possibility of a nuclear war.

Today, I want to remind you that I do not use Proctortrack. So, please do not write me asking if I use Proctortrack. Nor will I be checking—I will not be checking how much time you spend online simply because Brightspace does not record properly the time that is spent online. It is not recorded and I will not pay attention to whether you access the lessons and for how long unless, of course, you get 100% on the exams and then I do a cross-check.

The class is full. Please do not write to me as students are at this very moment, as today is the last day. You cannot skip the queue for any reason. The class was filled a long time ago and I do not control access. I will not write reference letters for anyone in this class due to the nature of an online class. I cannot study your CV and transcript. Otherwise, I would have to write reference letters for everyone in the class. And that would be doing you what's called a disservice. You need a reference letter from a fourth-year professor who knows you, who has heard you, perhaps a third-year professor. I would not be doing you a service by writing you any kind of a reference letter for medical school, law school, or anything like that.

We do not know whether we will have a TA. There are 1,800 students in the class. I do not know whether I will have a TA and their tasks are not clear. I mentioned that because I have programmed the exam and the quiz dates on the course calendar. They are not in the course syllabus. Please do not write me asking me to confirm whether you understand whether the quiz and the exam dates are correct. You can use the chatbot. Please do not write me again, as students are doing, asking me again when the dates are. You are responsible. You're grown up.

New lectures are posted for sure by Thursday each week depending on the guest lectures. Sometimes the guest lectures cancel on me many times. And for example, today I'm early because I did the guest lecture in October. Recording and setting up lectures takes a lot of time. Please be patient and please do not write me every day on Monday asking me when I'm going to post the stuff because your schedule demands that you keep up. I'm trying to keep up too. And so let's just all work together and try to stay positive.

President Putin has delivered, as of January 11th, a warning shot using a nuclear-capable missile and that sent a message to Europe and to Canada and the NATO countries days after they agreed to a post-war security guarantee. And so it's not certain what is going to happen right now. It is particularly interesting because Russia equipped the missile with dummy warheads—they didn't equip it with nuclear warheads—and so without those nuclear warheads, it appears like this Oreshnik missile is technically underwhelming, but it is sending a message.

The message is a warning message. They are saying that they are willing to use an expensive system. They can only produce a small number of those missiles each year. And to use it on Kyiv in an attack confirms that they are trying to say that they want to intimidate Europe and also North America.

Here's some pictures of the Oreshnik missile. And you can see my picture is hiding some of the details of this intermediate-range ballistic missile that can go very quickly. It has the capability of multiple, up to six, nuclear warheads. Mr. Putin therefore is trying to manipulate a sense of nuclear risk, arguably, and we're going to talk a lot about that in this lecture. We're going to start talking about the effects of threats.

Many of us who lived—I didn't myself live through the Cuban Missile Crisis, but many older experts say that our present-day crisis is actually riskier, far more riskier in a multipolar world with many powers having nuclear weapons than it was back in the bilateral world of two superpowers, Russia and the United States. So, we need to think just like the EXCOMM pictured here, the Executive Committee during the Cuban Missile Crisis that advised President Kennedy. We need to think of how to extricate ourselves from this mess that we're in, which could lead to war due to miscalculation, misperception, and misunderstanding—the "three misses."

So, war is folly, and assuredly here's President Zelenskyy and also President Putin. And I'm sure that President Putin is possibly rethinking his initial decision to attack Kyiv in order to topple Volodymyr Zelenskyy's government. He has not been able to do so in nearly five years. He has not been able to liberate the Donbas region by sheer force and by persuasion. They held some referenda in Donetsk, Luhansk, Kherson, and Zaporizhzhia, where the nuclear power plant is, but that will not obscure the reality that Russia's hold over the war-torn region will be tenuous for decades to come because there are so many people who hate Russia, who are of Ukrainian citizenship and descent.

So, here's a picture of the disputed areas and the possibility of a new central force in Europe going along here or here. We're not sure. Now, Russia's already taken here and I'll talk to you about that in the next slide. So, there's Ukraine, Russia, and the neighboring country—Moldova is not part of NATO. Romania and Poland are. I'll talk more about NATO in the weeks to come and especially in lesson 8, but right now we will just be focusing for a few moments on the Crimean Peninsula. The Crimean Peninsula was annexed by Russia in 2014 and that is now under constant threat. Indeed, the Russian submarines are not able to harbor there safely and they're being redeployed up to the Arctic and to the Baltic Sea. I'll show you up north of the Baltic Sea that way. It is currently unknown whether the submarines that sabotaged the Nord Stream 1 and 2 pipelines, possibly in order to force Europe to stop supporting Ukraine. No one really knows who cut those pipelines. NATO is conducting exercises in the Black Sea to protect the ships.

Now, I looked up the notes that are available for you, many, many different notes. Here's a student who has assiduously done 25 pages of written notes on what I said. You could study the 25 pages, but I think it's actually easier and faster just to listen to the lecture once or twice. Some students listen to it twice and not make a whole transcript and study the transcript. The transcript is only necessary if you're going to cheat using ChatGPT and you're going to look up the answers. But there I'm going to foil you again and I'll show you how because I just look and see every time I do the lecture I do different stuff. I say different things here. I'm not saying that today. I haven't said anything about that. I did last year say that it might be the Russians but we don't really know.

So that student's notes, well these are the notes from Chat. So all I did is type in, let's say there was a question that on the multiple choice: "who cut the Nord Stream 1 and Nord Stream 2 pipelines?" You can cheat but then Chat's going to give you a tremendous amount of information that you have to read during a multiple choice exam. Right now nobody knows, no one knows who cut those pipelines, and this is kind of interesting. You can read that but you don't have time during a multiple choice exam.

Okay. As each day passes the nuclear threats Putin has made, of which there are more and more, are veiled in, I would say, grandiosity. But the question is whether deterrence has been weakened or strengthened. And our guest speaker is going to address that. He's going to argue that deterrence has prevented Putin from attacking NATO. Is he right or is he wrong? Let's listen to the guest speaker. Is the threat of an above-ground demonstration shot of a nuclear weapon in Russia's Far East more or less credible? Nobody knows. Opinions vary.

Maybe it is more likely that nuclear weapons would be used today after the attack using a nuclear-capable missile on Kyiv. Or maybe it was more likely in February 2022 when they first invaded Kyiv. Unlikely events happen all the time. They do. And that's my argument, my counterargument to Guy Roberts, is that if a nuclear war was to happen, even though it's an unlikely event, it would lead—it could trigger a nuclear winter.

I'm going to talk more about what all this means in a few minutes. Nuclear threats are always a bluff until the day they are not. And President Putin's aggressive threats lower the threshold for nuclear use. So we'll say: lower the threshold of the ladder of escalation. It makes it more likely that they will escalate. It will increase, it will decrease—the argument goes back and forth, back and forth. But essentially we use the words "escalation" and "threshold." I'm not sure why.

Okay, so the argument's made that winter is always coming and Russia is superior in terms of its chokehold on European gas, which they need in the winter, and also they have superior equipment, training in the Arctic and so on. And that means that they can mobilize more easily. They have a conventional advantage, and that's always the traditional argument that was made, especially in 2022. But now the Ukrainians have received literally billions of dollars of sophisticated weapons. We'll talk more about the kinds of weapons in future weeks, especially when we talk about NATO, but they've received these weapons from Canada, the United States, from all over Europe. And why? Because Europeans are afraid of another World War II, World War I, the horror of mass graves, seeing torture, dead bodies, seeing the use of Russian, even North Korean soldiers and mercenaries, prisoners. This removes the West's reluctance to ratchet up the conflict by filling the Ukrainian war chest.

Okay, so let me explain that further. Here we can see Kim Jong-un of North Korea and the poorly equipped and poorly trained North Korean soldiers being sent to fight—Russia, the ally, North Korea's ally. And there they are being sent off to fight against the Ukrainians as well. The Russians have been using prisoners, their own prisoners, to fight in the first wave that first attacks Ukrainians conventionally. Here in 2022 is Yevgeny Prigozhin and he has since been killed; he was killed in a plane crash, but he did try to—I wrote an entire column on this the day after it happened. It seems like he tried to do a civil overtake of even Moscow, but we don't know. Here's a picture of a Russian prisoner who was deployed on the front, released, and went back home and murdered two more people. So they're using prisoners to fight.

Already this is a war of attrition, and attrition means trying to wear each other down, and experts caution that Putin—kind of like they'll use the term "a desperate cornered rat"—may use nuclear weapons to force the enemy to back down. This is a very popular American argument and it is also part—Americans will always refer to this: "escalating to de-escalate." In fact, Guy Roberts refers to it and then I have to correct him. It's escalating to de-escalate. You shouldn't really correct famous speakers.

The White House's warnings are stark. The people in the United States are stark. Even outgoing US President Biden—when he was outgoing US President—made clear at the UN General Assembly (and there's a link there in the PowerPoint slides to his speech, but you do not need to listen to his speech). That was one of his last speeches at the UN. And what he's saying is that we have to meet these challenges and build a future rhetoric of cooperation.

President Biden's Secretary of State—so this is the first time I introduced the word Secretary of State. We have Minister of Foreign Affairs; they have Secretaries. Okay? So keep that in mind. And they refer to a State Department. So here you have Antony Blinken who was the US Secretary of State. Boy, it would be good to have him as a guest speaker, right? He could come in; he'd be pretty jaundiced and angry. Anyway, he said that they told Moscow that...