Welcome to lesson 2B on nuclear weapons and nuclear proliferation. We will be going through a lot of new terms for you and some of this may be too quick. Those of you that have taken my other courses will be familiar with many of these concepts. First of all, we're going to talk about a multipolar world, many powers, and the problem of nuclear weapon proliferation.

So because of the end of the Cold War, many people think that actually a nuclear exchange is more likely today than it was back in the bipolar world during the Cold War. And that's because of the chance of accidental nuclear war, misperception, miscommunication, misunderstanding, and also the doctrine of nuclear deterrence and preemptive nuclear warfare. Preemptive nuclear warfare.

Given that there were many past nuclear accidents—you can read about failures of communication in 1984 and so on—the chance of a nuclear exchange is higher as more and more countries obtain nuclear weapons. Can you survive a nuclear war? Certainly not. And it is useless to try to read those sort of nuclear war survival skills, building a bunker in your backyard and so on.

Perhaps I put a map here. Many Europeans are worried about a war in Europe. So here's the Baltic countries and Kaliningrad, which belongs to Russia, that has deployed nuclear weapons. Now, the problem is the divide between the nuclear-weapon states that have nuclear weapons, that brandish nuclear weapons, that wave them around as if they're credible and usable without realizing the humanitarian consequences for humans, for human security worldwide because of a nuclear accident or a nuclear war. So they are opposed to the non-nuclear-weapon states, the NNWS, and they are increasingly frustrated with the nuclear-weapon states because of their relatively slow pace of nuclear disarmament since 1945.

Five state parties, members of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, are not part of the NPT. It's a pretty successful treaty when you think about it. It was established back in 1968 and experts predicted that 25 to 30 nuclear-weapon states would happen within 20 years, and that's what did not happen. This means that they did predict what they called a "nuclear jungle" with no overarching power like the UN would happen by around 1988, and that didn't happen. There is no nuclear jungle with no rules right now because, arguably, because of the NPT, the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty review conferences and the regime, and the nuclear taboo which I'll talk about in a few minutes, and because of the international opprobrium about the use of nuclear weapons.

So I put here a picture of Douglas Roche, who was a speaker just recently at my most recent class, and he argued that there would be a nuclear jungle. He's been very strong about the NPT over the years. A retired... established the Middle Power Initiative. And I put here a picture of another diplomat who I invited to the class here. She's the Minister. She was the Ambassador to Iran, but I think she's probably not going to be able to speak because once you are retired, you still have for a few years... you're not allowed to talk about diplomacy. I'm still negotiating with her.

State parties are not part of the NPT and there's five. So the five state parties are India, Israel, Pakistan, and South Sudan—which doesn't have nuclear weapons for sure—and then the DPRK, North Korea, the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. The DPRK acceded, meaning they signed the NPT back in 1985, but they never came into compliance with the safeguards and announced their withdrawal—its withdrawal.

The other problems, and we're going to go through a lot of them now, are the spread of nuclear weapons into space because of the ballistic missile defense program. The Golden Dome—I'll be talking about that. The spread of nuclear weapons under Arctic ice and into oceans, off the coasts, hidden.

The NPT has a review conference about every five years. The next one will be in 2026 because of COVID; it's delayed. These are international and national conferences and it all leads up every five years to the NPT review conference. I'm attending a meeting and I'm hosting meetings and so on to get ready for the NPT review conference in consultations with the Nuclear Arms Control and Disarmament Division of Global Affairs Canada on January 30th. We're all concerned about nuclear weapons spreading into space, into oceans, and also under the ice.

Experts are concerned particularly about the implications of the US Ballistic Missile Defense project, which President Trump has called the Golden Dome. This is a project that's been around for a long time and has great implications for Russia's sense of insecurity and China's nuclear defense posture and implications for space debris out in space.

I'll talk about a lot of these issues, but this is just our sort of 2B and we're trying to get some of the vocabulary about talking about Canada around too. So Canada, Prime Minister Carney has been asked by President Trump to participate in the Golden Dome and they are holding high-level discussions about that right now, whether Canada will join that project which has implications not for just Canada and the Arctic but also for Iran, Ireland—Iran, Ireland too actually, it's a middle power—Greenland and Denmark. Greenland is part of Denmark.

The nuclear weapons operating under the ice—we'll talk about that when we talk about Arctic sovereignty—but they're also a big problem. Although they're contributing to the strategic triad and to stability, they can hover unseen, virtually undetectable for weeks at a time under the Arctic ice—Russians, Americans, and Chinese—or off the coasts, let's say, of the United States.

I have been active for 25 years with the Canadian Pugwash Group. There's a picture of me looking, well, 10 years ago when I was at the NPT. Adele Buckley has died this summer, very sadly. And she was spearheading at the age of 88 a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Arctic. And I worked with her and Roméo Dallaire, the general who opposed the genocide in Rwanda. And I've worked for a long time with Alyn Ware, who just got the alternate Nobel laureate, which is a prize of 50,000 for an alternate peace. President Trump is not asking for that one. Anyway, I've worked with various people on denuclearizing. And if you're interested in helping, we sure need people. There's only a few of us left. In fact, really only very few. We have some money. We have about $10,000 to do a campaign. But I mean, here I am writing an article with Roméo Dallaire. And see the picture they put of the snake with the tip of the snake, which is an ICBM over the Arctic. I thought it was a cool picture to show you.

Okay, so the United States, the United Kingdom, and the Soviet Union—now called Russia—emerged as victors. They were victorious from World War II. And the NPT enshrines their right to openly possess nuclear weapons. They possessed nuclear weapons at the time that the NPT was signed back in 1968. So the treaty acknowledges their nuclear status, but it is not a formal approval for them holding nuclear weapons. So they're called the "Big Three." So the great powers, the Big Three: the United States, Russia, and China. Those are the Big Three.

The Big Five are also the United Kingdom—which includes Scotland, Wales, and England—and also France, a unitary state. Those five have veto power in the United Nations General Assembly... which you just saw me pictured at 15 years ago. No, 10 years ago. At the most successful—that was the most successful. That's why I was looking so happy. We just succeeded in getting 64 planks for the NPT review conference. But all that has gone by the wayside now. Diplomacy is so despairing.

I put a woman here shaking her head because so many students of mine have written, when I used to teach in person, essays on reforming the UN Security Council, reforming the UN General Assembly. I think I've read hundreds of essays on that and all of those people—I don't know where they are, teachers, diplomats now—but nothing has happened. So the assumption then was having nuclear weapons equates to veto power. But that would mean that if other non-nuclear-weapon states like, let's say in alphabetical order always so as not to give priority, Germany, Japan, Nigeria, and South Africa could wield the veto power eventually—unlikely. But if you are interested, I did do a reading course on the United Nations Security Council reform two years ago for Jasdeep Sidhu and there's a supplementary lecture on how to be an excellent student that you can listen to with Jas on that if you want, and other students obviously.

Okay. So, North Korea has continually fired rockets—not yet with nuclear weapons on them—and since 2016 and it has said that it has a hydrogen bomb. It conducted it in 2016. I showed you a picture of Kim Jong-un. He is Russia's close ally now and is sending prisoners to fight against Ukraine. I was in South Korea here in the Demilitarized Zone and saw all these tunnels and was in Seoul. So here there's the partition line. There's the line between North and South Korea. So I looked this way into North Korea.

Okay. So we mentioned that North Korea is not part of the NPT and we mentioned that there are negotiations through the NPT review conference, but the whole process is really deadlocked because of the existence of the arsenal of the P5. The P5, the Permanent Five, the five that I talked about—the three and the two. The United States and Russia have the most nuclear weapons, but bilateral arms negotiations concerning their relatively larger arsenals are going too slowly according to the non-nuclear-weapon states. And that's very true. President Trump just recently said that they will not renew the New START in February, next month, because the negotiations are just not working and he thinks he can start the negotiations again. So here you see all these old men negotiating.

Okay. Diplomats still argue. We argue vehemently about this. People that are involved in this like Ambassador Peggy Mason, who I tried to get to speak to our UN class—I'm still working on that. Ernie Regehr, who just got the Canadian Peace Prize. They argue... I listened to them in October argue for one full hour about a certain article and about whether it was diplomatic to criticize other countries or not. One full hour in front of a big audience. We were all kind of wondering like, wow, if they're arguing—these two are on the same side—then imagine how much the Russians and the North Koreans would be arguing.

Anyway, we talk a lot about Article VI and good faith and so on, but I talk a lot about NATO's Strategic Concept. So, I'm considered to be an expert on NATO. I've written many, many articles on NATO. Just type in "Erica Simpson NATO." I've written a book on NATO and the Bomb, but anyway, NATO Strategic Concept is non-binding. It's a document they issue over and over again, and the basic language of it is always the same.

There's Guy Roberts. Guy Roberts, the person who I interviewed here for a class. There he is much younger, probably 20 years ago. And Jamie Shea, who I interviewed, the longest-serving diplomat at NATO. I've interviewed him three times. He just retired. I interviewed him on his last day, on his last afternoon, which was a great interview. They always say the same thing: the supreme guarantee of the allies, that the French and the UK nuclear weapons are a contribution to their overall deterrence and security. So now I'm bringing up this word: don't be afraid of "deterrence." So NATO Strategic Concept says as long as nuclear weapons exist, NATO will remain a nuclear alliance, which basically means forever.

Okay. So there's mounting nuclear arsenals and modernization. And now I'm going to start talking about modernization and negative and positive security assurances. So I'm not going to get too much into this. Negative assurances mean that you can threaten a country that's not part of the NPT. So for example, you could threaten the DPRK. Right now Putin and Trump are threatening everyone. And I'll talk about that in lesson C. But positive security assurances reassure a country that has signed the NPT, or any other guarantee, that it is committed to defending. So that's what Ukraine wants. It wants a positive security assurance to say that they will be defended in case of an attack. Here we're talking about it in the context of a nuclear attack.

So that's why Japan does not need yet to come out and say they're going to develop their own nuclear weapons. There is Paul Meyer, whom I'm meeting with next week, who's the former Ambassador to the Conference on Disarmament. Kim Campbell, the former Prime Minister of Canada, the only female. Doug Roche. And then Jonathan Granoff, the President of the Global Security Institute, whom I interviewed for my other class. So some of you will have heard a lot about nuclear weapons if you're taking all three of my classes. But that's good because that's important. So is climate change.

Okay, I mentioned to you Paul Meyer. Paul Meyer mourns this terribly. He was a diplomat for years at the conference and he always brings up in his speeches—if you heard him in my other class—that they're deadlocked and they have not done anything for decades. He gets quite uptight about it. That's because the NPT has many loopholes, ways to get around it despite the additional protocols and so on. Merely the fact that it almost condones Iran's pursuit of nuclear energy. Iran has tons of oil. Why does Iran need nuclear energy? It has tons and tons of oil. But anyway, the NPT is not really able to cope with North Korea, Syria possibly having nuclear weapons in the long run, Saudi Arabia, and other mounting arsenals outside the NPT framework. It's an older treaty and it's difficult.

Now Canada actually helped to establish the Global Partnership Program and we're very proud of that and we've spent billions on it. I'm going to Ottawa at the end of the month for the nuclear arms control disarmament discussions. I'm invited as an expert and believe me I know they will be talking with a whole PowerPoint program for one hour about the Global Partnership Program and how they have contributed to it. Russia has canceled its participation. It doesn't want its sovereignty undermined. And poorly paid Russian soldiers and so on continue to be a problem because they could sell nuclear material on the black market.

Okay. So the Global Partnership Program deals with trained physicists, trying to pay them, and skilled nuclear workers in Russia and soldiers. And that's a long-term concern and the United States and Canada together have spent literally billions and billions of dollars on that. It's a very important program. According to Senator Richard Lugar, more such partners are needed worldwide concerning other nuclear powers, but there are none.

Okay. So a tactical nuclear war would cause nuclear winter and famine. I mentioned this before and now I want to go through these slides which show you global warming due to the industrial revolution and so on. And then that's global cooling because of a regional nuclear war using approximately 100 nuclear weapons. Now if they were to use more nuclear weapons then there would be a global cooling of minus 4 degrees around the world, let's say, because of using their high-alert nuclear weapons. And then this was what we envision could happen during the Cold War where they used all of their nuclear weapons, the global nuclear arsenal, and then you would also have a nuclear winter.

So that's global warming since 1880. And you can see that a nuclear winter would cool down the whole earth considerably. Here's the view of the Apollo 10 view of the Earth in 1969 from 26,000 nautical miles and you can see Mexico there. And that's what the world would look like after a large-scale nuclear holocaust. And you can see the clouds of smoke and resulting fires would essentially cover the entire Northern Hemisphere and also all the way down to New Zealand within two weeks.

So the problem is, let's say there was a local regional war between—just for example—between India and Pakistan. They each have approximately 150 nuclear weapons approximately. India is going to obtain more nuclear weapons soon but I'll talk about that in a minute. So here what we see is, let's say they used 100 Hiroshima-size nuclear weapons, or 0.05% of all the US-Russian deployed weapons approximately—used somewhere around the world, 0.05%. Then there would be millions of tons of smoke rising into the stratosphere and global temperatures would drop to what they were 10,000 years ago, to Little Ice Age levels. 25 to 40% of the ozone around the world would be destroyed at the mid latitudes and 50 to 70% would be destroyed at northern high latitudes.

Okay. So here you can see, let's say there was a nuclear war with just 100 Hiroshima-size nuclear weapons. This is how the earth would cool over a period of two weeks. So you can see the temperature is dropping all around the world. I'm covering New Zealand, but eventually New Zealand will also freeze and there would be worldwide famine. The entire global economy would completely collapse. Billions of people would die of starvation within a few weeks, if not for certain a few months. And there you are. So, we'll just let that run for a few minutes to absorb the impact and the recognition that where my red laser dot is is where I am right now. And you can see the temperature is just continually dropping into a nuclear winter, even if it's summer.

Okay, moving on. So, there's the change in average surface temperatures two years after an India-Pakistan nuclear war. And you can see the temperature has dropped by around 1.5 degrees in Toronto and then it's also dropped all around the world here. You can't quite see Australia and New Zealand. It's dropped around particularly in the Northern Hemisphere. That doesn't mean you should try to move to New Zealand. You can't escape it.

Here's the changes in global precipitation. So you can see that it's a drought. There's not much... anyway, it's just extremely concerning.

Okay. What about would there be a nuclear winter from the use of loose nukes and dirty bombs? No. They think that the damage would be... it depends where. If it was in New York City it would obviously damage and kill millions of people. But a dirty bomb, let's say smuggled from Canada in kitty litter across into New York City or Washington... the main issue there is people would flee to 27 cities all around the United States. They would flee out of the cities into the country for days at a time; they wouldn't come back into their cities. So this is called nuclear terrorism and Graham Allison, who's a famous writer about the Cuban Missile Crisis, has written a lot about that. But a dirty bomb is not as big a concern as tactical or strategic or hydrogen nuclear weapons.

Okay. So this leads me to talk about the problem of nuclear waste, which will remain dangerous for literally hundreds of thousands of years. The radiation reduces over thousands of years. But until we figure out what to do with the nuclear waste—the high-level rods and the low-level and intermediate-level nuclear waste—then we have a problem. Nuclear terrorists could perhaps capture the trucks and so on that are carrying nuclear waste. And nuclear waste right now is stored above ground. There's no working underground depository anywhere in the world. Finland's working on one and Canada has some proposals. I'll talk to you about that.

But here's the Bruce Power nuclear reactor, which is on the shore of Lake Huron up north of Goderich in Kincardine. And these could be soft targets for their nuclear... and so they are surrounded... I've visited it. It's surrounded with barbed wire and security guards and protected by the IAEA, the International Atomic Energy Agency. But I'm well known for arguing that it's a threat, a terrorist threat.

And Canada's proposed... there's some proposals. This I could talk for an hour on this one single slide, but essentially there's been a few proposals and the current proposals are to build a nuclear waste site 46 km away from the Bruce reactor. And then another one up in Ignace. And so one is called Ignace and the other one is called Teeswater. Now down here, this is a—I mentioned there's no real depository. This is an artist's rendition of one that they could have built in Yucca Mountain in Nevada, but that was rejected by President Obama and then President Trump started that process again and he's considering it and so on. They need to do something with their waste. They may look up north to Canada and say, "Oh, we should use Canada."

Okay? So, I'm a critic of the two sites and so I'm very aware of the fact... I don't want to bias you against it. So, for example, this picture could be seen as biasing you because there's: Lake Huron, how far away is the site, and so on. Is it limestone, and so on? So, these are some questions that are being asked. So, where is it? It's right there on the shore of the Great Lakes, the largest freshwater reserve in the world. And there you can see 30 km. So it would be around here close to Kincardine, the one 46 km away from Douglas Point, from the many reactors here. This is the largest operating nuclear reactor in the world. There's different reactors in here. So right now they're burying the waste here above ground at the Western Waste Management Facility, but the proposal is to take all of Canada's waste—the low and intermediate level—and put it here.

Now, of course, the people in Ignace are opposed. Many people are opposed to having the nuclear waste from Pickering and Darlington and from Quebec and from New Brunswick all trucked up to their tiny area. Particularly First Nations are opposed. So, the Nuclear-Free North... there's information. They have the best website on trying to figure out this issue. I highly recommend this one run by Brennain Lloyd if you want to learn.

So this is the only map I could find, and of course it was on their website. So there's all the proposed transportation of the nuclear waste. There would be... I think it was... I can't quite remember but the estimate is that there would be, for 30 years, 50 trucks. I don't want to say it because... and I don't want to say what their estimate is because it's so incredibly concerning about accidents and so on. And this road is... you've driven... I've driven this road. This is essentially a two-lane highway and in the winter it is very difficult. It's also crossing many First Nations. So if you want to get involved, take a look at that site.

The decision will be made in the next few years, mainly this year, and that leads me to talk about dismantled nuclear weapons and waste. So the NPT allows countries to develop nuclear energy. Iran has the right to develop its own nuclear energy. So at the same time we're kind of preserving the NPT and saying you can have your own nuclear energy. Something has to be done with the nuclear waste from dismantled nuclear bombs and from nuclear power planes—plants that have to be decommissioned over time.

The fact that the United States at the same time is modernizing its nuclear weapons. This is the whole nuclear modernization debate that Guy Roberts actually spearheaded. And that's the idea. And it's interesting because in this unit he refers to it all. In the first one he talks about it and the necessity of it and so on. But now, despite the cost of modernization being in the tens of billions, that's not his main concern. The threat is coming from other countries.

Okay. So what is the debate? The debate about the B-61 bomber here is whether these five countries in NATO in Europe should continue to host the United States nuclear weapons. And Russia points to that and says, "Well, we're going to put nuclear weapons in Kaliningrad because you have these tactical nuclear weapons in Germany, the United States, the United Kingdom, and Turkey." I talked to the mayor—not of Italy, but of Turkey once. I sat beside him at a conference and he was just so appalled that his own village was what he called a soft site, a soft target; that his own village would be wiped out because it was hosting these secret nuclear weapons.

I could get into this more, but Russia is revitalizing its Arctic bases. It's moving into the Arctic and it's refusing to negotiate about its advantage in tactical nuclear weapons. It has more tactical nuclear weapons than the United States. Russia is deploying nuclear weapons in the Arctic and it's dumping its waste, its nuclear waste, into rivers and frozen rivers in the Arctic. Meanwhile, the United State Department is maintaining that Russia is not willing to negotiate tactical nuclear weapons. And that's true. The Russians are saying that at the heart of this is the BMD issue and that that is the problem, the Golden Dome. And then President Trump is saying it's not worth keeping START. It's not worth renegotiating it. So in February of 2026, when New START collapses possibly, there will be no arms trade—there will be no more bilateral arms control—and that we will only have the NPT. That will be the only thing left. And the Outer Space Treaty too actually, if you... it's still there.

China's building its own modernized strategic triad. We'll talk more about China in future weeks and lessons. And other countries like France and Israel are refusing to talk publicly about their nuclear arsenal. This is called nuclear ambiguity. India is going to acquire... well it looks like Canada's uranium, a $3.9 billion deal.

So to end here on this part, lesson 2B, I read a lot of op-eds. I just wrote one with Dr. Gordon Edwards, the President of the Canadian Coalition for Nuclear Responsibility, about the implications for the NPT and also for transporting nuclear waste across Canada and the implications of those two dialogues, and the fact that we need to talk more openly about this. And that was in the Globe and Mail, which you don't have a subscription to—neither do I—but you can get it through the university through PressReader. So that was there and I just wanted to put that as a final kind of slide to tell you just how important I feel that this...