Okay, welcome to our last lecture before the guest speaker on nuclear weapons and the nuke map. Here's a picture of Hiroshima in 1945. I was there recently and it has regrown. The trees are back and so on, but there are many memorials and there is a museum which is well worth seeing.

Here's a picture from a credible authority, the Federation of American Scientists. Matt Korda is actually now located in Toronto, working online, and they use satellites. They use online and free accessible information to try to figure out the global nuclear warhead inventories around the world. So, they're considered to be incredibly credible. This is 2023 and they're saying that Israel has approximately 90 nuclear weapons. They don't know for certain, but that's what they're confirming. China, back then a year ago, had 410.

Here are some estimates from another American think tank called the Arms Control Association. Also very credible. Its founder, Daryl Kimball, raises money and they do their own estimates. So here you can see that in 2025, they're estimating that China has close to 600 nuclear weapons—a large jump which concerns many people around the world.

The other things that we refer to are "the bomb." "The bomb" is popular jargon. I wrote a book, *NATO and the Bomb*. "Hiroshima Day" is another popular term for commemorating Hiroshima and Nagasaki. The nuke map, we're referring to nuclear weapons or the missile map—these are popular websites that show you the impact of different types of bombs on cities like your own. Let's look for example.

Here, I put in London, Ontario. If it was hit by the first Hiroshima bomb—the small tactical weapon called Little Boy—it would kill approximately 263,000 people and there would be 512,000 injuries. So this is a very, very small tactical nuclear weapon.

Here, I put in London again, and now hitting it with a Russian bomb, which is a megaton bomb. And the fatalities are going all the way up to northern Ontario, with the estimated fatalities here of 435,000 and many, many more injuries. It would be impossible to cope with that many injuries.

Here, I put in Sudbury, close to Ignace, where the high-level intermediate nuclear waste site would be. So let's say that in a preemptive attack, Russia was to attack that with a very, very crude nuclear weapon—very, very crude, some terrorists or something. The fatalities are low because there's not that many people up in that area, and the injuries are low. But that's just from a small, let's say, "dirty bomb."

Here, more seriously, is a North Korean weapon tested in 2017. So they at that time said they couldn't reach the West Coast of the United States. They boast that they can now reach that far with their intercontinental ballistic missiles. And that's one of the reasons that people are talking about ballistic missile defense and a project in space to shoot down a single weapon like this. So, I put here the effect on Vancouver and you can see it's stretching all the way into North Vancouver, Richmond, Surrey, Burnaby and so on. The number of estimated casualties as well as injuries is very, very high—impossible to cope with at that point.

So in 2025, we commemorated the 80th anniversary of the use of atomic weapons over Japan. In 1945, a small 14-kiloton uranium bomb—carrying uranium, not plutonium—exploded at Hiroshima on August 6th, 1945. And then a plutonium bomb was dropped on August 9th, three days later, on Nagasaki. It killed between—the estimates are—129,000 and 226,000 people in total. So, we don't know the numbers that were killed in Hiroshima and Nagasaki accurately, but around that many people.

Here's the picture of the second-to-last survivor who lived in Canada, protected by his mother. So he was a very young baby, and he was killed by a drunk driver in Ottawa actually a few years ago. He was a very active Hibakusha. These are the people who are the survivors of Hiroshima and Nagasaki; they're called the Hibakusha.

Debates continue to this day about whether the bombings—whether not bombing Hiroshima and Nagasaki would have led to the surrender eventually of Japan or of the Emperor. There's no doubt that tens of thousands of Japanese civilians—and this is the use of nuclear weapons against civilians—were intentionally targeted from just two small detonations.

The International Court of Justice, in a legal international legal opinion, determined there exists an obligation to pursue in good faith and bring to a conclusion negotiations leading to nuclear disarmament. So here's a picture of the Bulletin... the atomic clock. It's still standing and it's also a memorial. You can go there and visit. Very moving. This is the river where hundreds of people fled down to the river burning up. And it's a very moving place to go.

I am a board member of many different organizations to do with nuclear weapons, to do with abolishing nuclear weapons, to say "no" to nuclear war. It's kind of what I've worked on for 30 years now. And so I'm part of the Canadian Network to Abolish Nuclear Weapons, on the board, and I'm also the president of the Canadian Peace Research Association. I've been a board member for a very long time of the Canadian Pugwash group. So I put the links in there; you'd have to go to the PowerPoint to link them. If you are interested in joining those organizations, students are always very, very welcome.

And that leads me to talk about the number of nuclear weapons that are remaining, which is around 12,500 or 13,000—you could argue 13,000—more than 90% belonging to Russia and the United States. And that's the serious thing here: this is a problem between the two superpowers and their bombs, some of which are in the megaton range. Their hydrogen bombs are thousands of times more lethal than tactical nuclear weapons.

Across the world, commemorative events are held every year to remind us of the terrible cost and the ongoing danger of the nuclear arms race, the modernization, and the impact of a limited nuclear missile exchange. Yet, the nine official and unofficial nuclear arms states are intent on rebuilding, modernizing, and retaining their nuclear warheads.

President Vladimir Putin's frequent references to the possible use of nuclear weapons seems to be leading to apathy. People don't seem to be able to do anything because they're terrified or they're just staying very quiet. I'm not sure. Are they fearful? We don't know a lot about nuclear weapons because they are a legacy of the last century, during the Cold War.

This year, the hands of the *Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists* Doomsday Clock now, as of February, point to 90 seconds to midnight. I don't know what they will be this coming February, but essentially they're moving them closer and closer to midnight. Midnight is global annihilation, extinction of the human species, the planet a rock in space with nothing on it. So, we have to obviously think about that and collectively take action. How you do that is up to you. But I think arguing for "no first use" in the United States is very popular—arguing that there should be no preemptive use of nuclear weapons. Currently, the United States and Russia do not have a "no first use" policy; China does. We could also follow in the steps of the United States and argue for de-alerting nuclear warheads. Some organizations are doing that, but there are American organizations ending "launch on warning" policies and so on. These are not substitutes for bringing about the kind of world that would be stable, that would not need nuclear weapons, because the genie is out of the bottle. Nuclear knowledge is here to stay. So we need deeper structural ways to solve conflict and to work toward peace on Earth.

Here in Canada, the government is not engaged in discussions about the TPNW or about sending observers. I'll be in Ottawa soon and we'll be making the same arguments that we always do: that we need to send observers to the TPNW, that we need to strengthen our stand at the NPT, and that we need to propose an NWC—a Nuclear Weapons Convention. The BWC (Biological Weapons Convention), the Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention, and the Chemical Weapons Convention are examples of what we can do. So these are a lot of acronyms, a lot of words, and that is how everyone talks. So I need to train you; I'm trying to train you to talk about all sorts of things, like trade and so on. I'm working toward that. This class is very focused on NATO and on President Trump's new ideas, like a "golden dome" in space. We talk a lot about nuclear arms control and disarmament in this lesson. And obviously, I think there should be more parliamentary debate. We'll talk more about how you can write a parliamentary resolution and what you can do to advance your goals and what you think is important. Obviously, I think nuclear abolition is important.

The janitor has started to wash the floor outside my office even though I have signs up. No, she's going to wash the floor. Okay, that's fine. I love her. Rosa—let's go talk to Rosa. No, I can't stop. Professor Simpson has argued—and I can't stop because I've argued for 30 years—that we need to undertake a leadership role within NATO toward creating the conditions for a world free of nuclear weapons, and Canada should spearhead a comprehensive re-examination of NATO's reliance on nuclear deterrence. So this is what I work on as a professor. I think there needs to be a rejection of deterrence. And that's why it's such an honor for me to have Guy Roberts speak to my class. He and I have been arguing about this at NATO headquarters since 2006. We're good friends. Even though we disagree, we're very, very good friends.

Abolition, I agree, will never happen in a strategic vacuum. I'm the first to say that it will take generations and generations to build a durable security framework based upon the principles of common security and sustainable peace in order to prevent future nuclear breakouts and arms races, including in space.

Europeans are encouraging their governments to take lead roles as part of the Stockholm Initiative. This is a multilateral forum that was established in 2019. It's not really going anywhere; it's working to try to strengthen the NPT. There's a picture of the UN General Assembly. We'll talk more about the UN.

And then finally, the Japanese survivors like Setsuko Thurlow—they believe that another future is possible. In the words of Beatrice Fihn, when they got the Nobel Peace Prize, "Ours is the only reality that is possible. The alternative is unthinkable." So you know, we have no choice. We have to work toward a world that is free of nuclear weapons.

Many people would like a Nobel Peace Prize, including President Trump. Here's a letter that I received yesterday from Setsuko Thurlow, the only surviving Hibakusha in her late 80s. She's asking me for my advice about some American who wants her to be one of the nominators of a guy, Mr. Meyer, and she hasn't heard of him. So she's asking me if I've heard of his good work. And then I wrote her yesterday, "You know, you don't need to reply or engage unless you have known the person." So, she wrote that letter back. I'm just pointing out to you that people are trying to get Nobel Peace Prizes for all sorts of things. But what about ending war?

And that leads me to end my part on whether nuclear weapons could be used in this century—not the last century, but now. And that leads me to talk about Mr. Trump, because he has now said on January 10th, 2026, "I don't need international law." He says power is constrained by his own morality. Now, he has on record said that he wants nuclear weapons to be more usable. And then he's also said he's afraid of nuclear war. Everything is a little bit contradictory. We're not sure what he thinks, right? But he knows that morality—the only thing that can stop him—is his own morality.

So this *New York Times* interview has gone all around the world. It was published on January 7th, and he said, "There's one thing: my own morality, my own mind. The only thing that can stop me." Kind of strange in terms of the limits on his international power. "I don't need international law. I'm not looking to hurt people," he's saying. So, this follows the United States attacks on seven countries in 2025. I looked for a map and the only map I could find was from Al Jazeera News picturing all the attacks in 2025.

Here's the US attack in Venezuela just recently. Here's another attack on Yemen—on the Houthis and Yemen destruction. Another attack on Syria. Here's Pete Hegseth, the Minister of War—I always call him "Minister of War." Here are the US strikes in Somalia. Here are the US strikes in Nigeria. So, I haven't put grizzly pictures of the effect, but if you are from Nigeria and you're in this class, why not come and talk to me? Maybe we can do a Zoom if you have experience or if you've seen anything like this.

If you're a student from Iraq or from Iran, why don't you contact me by email and maybe we can have some sort of a supplementary discussion. This is where the United States eliminated an ISIS leader, but then also they've been attacked. Americans have been attacked all over the place as well, so it's not like a one-way thing. This is the US attacks on nuclear sites in Iran, which I brought up in our first part in 2A. So they've attacked the nuclear facilities.

We will discuss when we cover NATO in Lesson 8, after the spring break, that President Trump is also threatening to take Greenland "the hard way." I'm not sure what "the hard way" means, but it is imperialism when you're saying that you can dominate other countries whether they like it or not. That goes against UN international law, the UN General Assembly, and so on. And he's spoken again about taking over Greenland on January 9th. I don't know by Lesson 8 what will have happened.

By Lesson 10, which will be for the final exam, we will be talking about Arctic sovereignty. And I want to conclude our series here by mentioning that for that class, I interviewed Arctic explorers who had actually kayaked across Baffin Island and gone toward Greenland. So they speak at length—before all these threats—about what this area is like, Arctic sovereignty, and the effect of climate change. They were on a wooden sailboat in Vancouver when I interviewed them. This is a very popular video. There's some minor concerns—basically they both were drinking wine, it was late for them, and they encountered a nuclear submarine off Victoria and so on. So it's an exciting interview. I don't want to necessarily delete it, but things will change by Lesson 10. We may be talking about some kind of an annexation of Greenland, in which case I'm thinking about interviewing a professor, Rob Hubert, who in the media is always put there to oppose me, just like Guy Roberts, and he's willing to come to the class and talk for 20 minutes. Okay, thanks for listening.