Cleaned Transcript 2D: c:\Users\krock\OneDrive\Desktop\throw\cleaned\w2\2D.txt

Hi everyone. I'm very happy to introduce to you two experts on deterrence, but really we're going to focus on Guy Roberts today. I want to introduce him at length, and so I will share a screen and that will help you to understand his background. 

Guy, I assume you can see the words. So Guy Roberts is an esteemed American government official, lawyer, and retired United States Marine Corps colonel. He served as the US Assistant Secretary of Defense for Nuclear, Chemical, and Biological Defense Programs from 2017 to 2019. He was appointed on November 3rd, 2017, during the first Trump administration. Mr. Roberts was the principal advisor to the Secretary of Defense—in the United States, that is the same as Canada's Minister of Defense—the Deputy Secretary of Defense, and the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics on matters concerning nuclear, chemical, and biological defense programs. In his role as the Assistant Secretary of Defense for nuclear, chemical, and biological weapons, Mr. Roberts was responsible for ensuring the safety, security, and effectiveness of the US nuclear deterrent. He led efforts to counter threats from improvised and weapons of mass destruction, including their effects and proliferation. His work was pivotal in maintaining robust defense mechanisms against such threats and ensuring the Department of Defense's compliance with nuclear policies and regulations. Throughout his tenure in the Trump administration and at NATO headquarters in Brussels, Mr. Roberts emphasized the importance of strategic deterrence in national defense and global security. His leadership and expertise significantly contributed to strengthening the United States' defense posture, safeguarding the nation, and addressing the evolving challenges posed by nuclear, chemical, and biological threats.

So I'm very happy to welcome Guy Roberts, and I'm also going to introduce to you one member in the audience, Robin Collins, who is the secretary to the Canadian Pugwash Group, which is part of the international conferences of the Pugwash movement. 

Okay, thank you, Guy. If you would like to see—

>> I would like to go ahead and start, I guess.

>> Yes. Yeah. Just go ahead and we have about 15 minutes.

>> Okay. Well, thank you very much, Erica, for that introduction. I know we've known each other for quite a while and shared many, many views, and most of them diametrically opposed in some respects. But the one thing I always say when I start talking about these issues is that no matter what your position is on deterrence or nuclear disarmament, we all want the same thing: we would all like a peaceful, secure, war-free world. It's just that we're coming from different poles, I guess you could say. 

I'm often reminded of the speech President Obama gave when he accepted the Nobel Peace Prize. What he said there is that we cannot stand idly by in the face of threats. For make no mistake, evil does exist in the world, and sometimes force is necessary. And in 45 years of doing this, I can absolutely vouch for that. We're even seeing that today. And it really gets back to: how do we confront evil? Vice President Cheney said, "We don't negotiate with evil; we defeat it." Unfortunately, we have a president now who believes that he can negotiate a land-for-deal transactional deal with an "evil empire," characterized by an evil man in my view: Vladimir Putin.

And that's diametrically opposed to history. In 45 years of dealing with this issue, we've seen that in spades. All you have to do is look at what's going on right now in the Ukrainian war, where Putin is the prima facie case of a war criminal committing it seems like every single law of war violation there is. He's managed to do it. We've got human trafficking, we've got drugs—you name it. And how do you deal with that? How do you face up to that?

One of the challenges in the non-proliferation world is the fact that some 24 or 25 agreements that we would characterize as non-proliferation or arms control agreements, every single one of them Russia has violated. I would commend our students to the State Department's compliance report on treaties that they publish every year. The latest one again documents in great detail all of the violations that the Russians have made with regard to their arms control agreements.

It's—and so now you're faced with: how do you deal with a country that refuses to comply with its international legal obligations?

The other challenge again with the Russian invasion of Ukraine is the assault on sovereignty by Russia, but broader, the assault on and the destruction of the rules-based international legal order that we've lived under for 80 years and has brought in an unparalleled history of growth, economic growth, expansion, and development that, as I said, is unparalleled. 

And now we have an individual that seeks to destroy that, to go back to the great power competition that we've seen prior to World War II. And all of that great power competition has resulted in two world wars. World War I, some 25 million people died. In World War II, estimates vary, but 50 million plus died as a result of that war. And oh, by the way, there were no nuclear weapons in either one of those cases. But we haven't seen any great power war since the end of World War II, which ended with the dropping of two nuclear weapons.

So we look at that and we're faced with—well, the dropping of these bombs raises profound ethical and moral questions that are hotly debated to this day. Many of those debates are in Pugwash and other forums. But there is the fact that we have seen no great power war since World War II. And no nuclear weapons have been used since August 1945. 

Which would suggest that deterrence is an effective policy. You know, we can debate that, and we do debate that. But, you know, the opponents of nuclear deterrence argue that strategy of war prevention that relies on the threat of nuclear annihilation is incompatible with moral and legal principles, such as proportionality and the protection of non-combatants in war. But nevertheless, although we may have this sword of Damocles hanging over our head, we haven't had any wars like that. In fact, the number of people dying from wars has dropped precipitously since the end of World War II. So these color everything that we talk about. 

And you know, in 45 years of dealing with these issues, I thought I would never see the wars that we have fought in Europe today. It's very disturbing and it's very challenging, and frankly, it's frightening. The only thing that seems to have worked is to confront evil and to make it clear that in their cost-benefit analysis of whether to go to war or not, it always comes out against them. So that they decide, when they wake up every morning and look around, they say, "Well, not today. We're not going to fight today because to do so would be catastrophic and we would be destroyed if we did that." 

But nevertheless, it's useful that we have a continued debate and proposals that come up. I'm going to make one proposal that I think would, in fact, push the game further ahead. 

First of all, one of the things that has been touted, so to speak, is the nuclear ban treaty. I did want to say that that is something that people were hopeful of, but of course none of the nuclear weapons states have signed onto the treaty. So it kind of sits out there. And the challenges there are multiple, and there haven't been any really concrete alternatives that someone could point to to say, "Well, this would substitute for the challenges of maintaining strategic stability and security."

The first question, of course, is: will it improve global security and stability, or will it undermine it? If you have a treaty like that that takes nuclear weapons out of the picture, what will replace it? Because it has proven to be something that has brought strategic stability, although a very dangerous one, I admit that. 

The second question is: will it build a coalition for disarmament or fracture the international community? Does it split it up in the sense that there may be countries that think that now that there are no nuclear weapons, we can pursue our hegemonic aspirations or claims of more territory, or challenge the very sovereignty of a nation in violation of Article 2(4) of the UN Charter? And those are questions that are left out there in various proposals that circulate to deal with that. 

Third point: will a nuclear ban treaty lead to real reductions in nuclear weapons, or would it be a treaty really for political or non-practical effect? What does nuclear abolition really mean? Frankly, there's no way to walk this dog back. That is: can we eliminate the knowledge about nuclear weapons? You can go on the internet and you can find out how to build a nuclear weapon. And if you manage to get your hands on fissile material—Uranium-235 or Plutonium—then all of the information is right there. And with enough resources, you can eventually build yourself an improvised nuclear device that would have devastating effect. How do you get rid of that? 

And that leads to a final question, and that is: how can such a treaty be verified? There are multiple pathways to acquire that. One example is the A.Q. Khan network. A.Q. Khan was the father of the Pakistani nuclear weapon. He stole a lot of the design things when he was a student. He developed a broad, vast network which he used selling nuclear technology and nuclear information to the highest bidder. We only found out about it when we intercepted a ship transporting nuclear materials and equipment to Libya. And to this day, we don't know the extent of that. And just recently, a member of the Yakuza, the Japanese mafia group, was arrested for offering to sell nuclear materials to the highest bidder. We did not know anything about that until there was an international trafficking interdiction effort made. 

So how do you deal with that? And when you do find—this is critical—finding is one thing, verifying is another, and then enforcing is another thing. How do you enforce such a treaty when a program is state-sponsored and there are many countries that are "virtual" nuclear weapons states? Germany is a virtual nuclear weapon state. Japan could potentially be a nuclear weapon state. They have the plutonium. They have the intercontinental ballistic missile capabilities. They have the infrastructure. All they lack is the political will to do so. 

One of the challenges that Putin has thrown down at us is his claim that they have new nuclear weapons that aren't governed by any treaty and that he would potentially use them against various states that impede his aspiration to build a new Russian empire. I'm sure there are many people in Ukraine to this day who rue the day that they gave up their nuclear weapons. At one point right after the collapse of the Soviet Union, Ukraine was the third largest nuclear weapons state. They gave up those nuclear weapons on promises from Russia, the UK, and the US that their territorial integrity and sovereignty would remain intact. Those promises, of course, were very quickly abandoned by Russia. So that's a really big challenge.

Which leads me to what I would like to suggest: one of the ways forward and one of the things that students can get involved in. One of the challenges is to have a dialogue between those that believe in nuclear deterrence and believe in its importance in maintaining peace—that is, avoiding conflict by great powers—and those that advocate, irrespective of the political situation, disarmament for disarmament's sake. I found that it's very difficult for those two particular groups to get together and have a dialogue. It's always been useful for me to talk with you, Erica, about these issues and at least understand what positions you're coming from. I think that's very, very important. 

I'm happy to say that over the last year or so, the State Department has come up with a program to do just that. They call it their "Creating an Environment for Nuclear Disarmament" (CEND) initiative. I don't know if you've heard of that, but this is an initiative in which they want to bring people from all walks of life and all advocates for different things to have a dialogue and try to build a step-by-step approach to where we end up with that happy day where we no longer need nuclear weapons to be part of our national security strategy.

But again, because of what Russia has done and what we're seeing going on with a peer competitor, China, rapidly building their nuclear weapon program—that is a very big challenge. And so I would ask that you take a look at that State Department program and you could reach out to them about participating in their efforts. 

Just a real quick word about US deterrence policy. Again, there's a lot of misinformation and disinformation out there. One of them is that the United States is part of an arms race. Well, the only thing the United States is doing is modernizing—with one exception—modernizing their current nuclear arsenal. They're not building up to anything more. Not, of course, like China, who's rapidly building up. Estimates vary, but soon they will have well over 400 intercontinental ballistic missile sites in their country, and they've got, of course, submarines carrying ballistic missiles and they're developing a bomber to do the same thing. And Russia has developed a whole cadre of new weapon systems that, again, are not under any treaty whatsoever. And of course, next year when the New START treaty expires—I frankly doubt that it will be renewed—then we will no longer have any arms control agreements with Russia.

The other thing I hear often is that our nuclear weapons are on hair-trigger alert. Nothing could be further from the truth. They're not. And that envisions somebody with their finger one inch from a button that'll launch World War III. We're a long way from that. There are a number of measures that have to be taken to get to the point where we'd actually launch a nuclear weapon. The readiness of those weapons are based on the security level that's determined through a number of different categories.

There's no policy of automatic retaliation. That's come up several times—that once we see launches, we would immediately launch. There is a deliberative process that's built into the warnings and indications and communication systems that manage our nuclear deterrent. And there are absolutely no plans for a preemptive use of nuclear weapons. Use of those weapons would be based on a deliberative process, usually in consultation with our allies before such weapons would be used. 

So the aim of our US deterrent policy is to prevent any use of nuclear force. The whole goal of deterrence is to ensure that nuclear weapons are never used in a military way. But as I've often said, we actually use nuclear weapons every single day because they are a political weapon. They are there to ensure that adversaries, when they do their cost-benefit analysis, always come to the conclusion that the costs far outweigh the benefits.

Well, let me stop there. Again, I think we're facing a real challenge to the international rules-based legal order. That goes far beyond a mere land grab by Russia taking territory from Ukraine. It has thrown the gauntlet down, challenging the rules that we've set forth in the UN Charter over territorial integrity and the right to sovereignty. Now we're facing a new era where the great powers would dictate to the small and middle powers what they should and shouldn't do and what kind of territory they're going to have. And we've seen in the past what kind of results would occur. So I can't stress enough, in my view, the importance of standing firm and tall and enforcing the system that we have now in the face of this existential threat. Let me stop there and happy to have any questions.

>> Thank you. Thank you, Guy. That was an excellent, very succinct and cogent summary of many arguments in favor of the nuclear deterrent strategy and policy of the United States. So I thank you for preparing that. I've heard your arguments before, and every time I'm very much persuaded, and then I recall my arguments against you because, as you know, what we talk about—I'm glad you raised the idea of a dialogue. 

In view of that, I invited Robin Collins to ask a question—just a single question, Robin—and then maybe a follow-up. So Robin, go ahead.

>> Thanks very much, Guys. Listening to it, I was taking a million notes. I actually have more than two questions, but let me just—I would like to get a discussion about no first use at some point, but let me go to the key questions I wanted to ask. I think your argument is that nuclear deterrence is safer than no nuclear deterrence. I think that's an underlying argument that you're making. So a key question for me is: in your view, is nuclear deterrence permanent, and therefore what conditions would have to exist for nuclear deterrence to be disposed of?

>> Okay, thank you for that. I don't think nuclear deterrence is permanent. For what I see is going on in the development of technologies, there are things happening that I am very surprised about. Drone warfare that we are seeing going on right now and the technological advances which bring moral and legal challenges. You may know that, for example, there's a movement now to ban robots on the battlefield. There's a conference held every year in Geneva, 30 or 40 nations attend. We are very close to Terminator-type technologies. There was a robotics conference just last month—unbelievable how well-developed these robot systems are. And it raises some very interesting, as I said, moral and legal issues about authorizing robots to engage in combat, and what are the rules regarding that? Whose responsibility is it to ensure that non-combatants are kept as safe as possible in environments like that? Those technologies, especially the precision technologies, have gotten to the point where we see fewer and fewer instances where nuclear weapons would be a method of choice. 

We haven't reached that point where you can say, "Well, we don't need nuclear weapons as the ultimate," because I think there still is a feeling that you can overcome those. The guy that invented—Fritz Haber, I think his name is—he invented gas warfare in World War I, and when asked why he did this, he came up—I think he invented phosgene and a few of the others, mustard gas and sarin—he said, "Well, these weapons are so horrible that once people see them, they won't engage in warfare." Well, he was wrong. They simply—the allied side did develop their own gas warfare and went ahead with it. Fast forward to the use of—

>> I'm sorry. Go ahead.

>> Well, I'm just wondering in terms of technological development, do you think that the United States, China, and Russia will go into space? Trump has been talking about a US space force. I mean, I understand your argument about drones, and now they're developing nets against drones, but don't you think it makes sense to go into space? Wouldn't that be the next frontier?

>> Yes. I mean, of course, they've got the Golden Dome program the United States is developing, which is really kind of an evolution of the "Brilliant Pebbles" initiative that they had with the Strategic Defense Initiative in the Reagan administration. And yeah, I think that's going forward as well. And there are a number of technologies that could be used. Some suspect that the Chinese have already developed satellites that could be flown into other satellites that could create havoc. 

>> Balloons. I mean, the ubiquitous explosion of technologies in different directions that weren't predicted means it's hard to really get your hands around all of this stuff, you know. And I think the consequences of using nuclear weapons—the incidental effects, the collateral damage—it makes people hesitate.

>> Yeah. The nuclear taboo. 

>> Right, and this is the other problem is that, you know, again that Putin has laid the lie to the US or the nuclear weapons states' positive and negative security assurances. We promised that we would never use or threaten to use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear weapons states and gave those assurances, and we'd do it again in 2026 at the next review conference. But nobody is going to believe it because Russia has threatened to use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear weapon states. What's the consequence of that? Which leads to the next question, of course: countries like Turkey, Saudi Arabia, even Germany and Japan have started to have a dialogue—South Korea—about, "Well, we need to have nuclear weapons because those security assurances that were given to us don't mean anything."

>> This is a good segue into the question about no first use. If it's the case that the United States and other nuclear weapons states would never use nuclear weapons against a conventional threat, then they should be able to support together, not unilaterally, a no-first-use policy. But I don't think that's actually the policy. I think the policy is to use the threat of nuclear warfare against a conventional threat as well as against a nuclear threat to deter both. Am I not correct?

>> Yes, I think you are correct because in my job at NATO, it was quite clear. I was there from 2005 to 2011, but I was also in the Defense Department dealing with NATO from 2000 on. When the seven new states joined NATO in 2003, which include the Baltic states, every single one of those countries said that the primary reason they joined is to come under the nuclear umbrella of NATO. And that was incredibly important for them. They are some of the countries that have very forcibly come out against the no-first-use idea because they want that threat to be real and palpable to Russia, primarily, that if they invaded these countries, in order to stop them, the threat or actual use of nuclear weapons would be in play. They believe very strongly that that threat is what keeps the Russians on their side of the border. 

And likewise, I've had several conversations. In fact, last November, I was in Turkey for a conference, gave a speech there, and several people afterwards came up and talked about: "Well, you know, if we can't be under a nuclear umbrella, then we're going to develop our own." In fact, Erdogan has actually said that there's no reason why we shouldn't have nuclear weapons. And that's one of the real challenges: the non-proliferation aspect, the very important part of keeping countries from thinking that their strategic safety and security means they need to acquire that weapon capability as well.

>> Thank you, Guy. I recall when we met back in 2006 and you were, I believe, chairing the Nuclear Planning Group on behalf of the United States, which is the official group that meets every week to talk about nuclear issues. So you were highly experienced back then in 2006 and then went on to be really at the apex of power, just below the Secretary of Defense, but also in charge of not just nuclear modernization but biological and chemical weapons as well. So this has been a very rich discussion. Thank you very much. I want to emphasize to everyone that's listening that Guy also attended the nuclear Non-Proliferation Review Conferences, and I saw him there in 2010 and 2015. So you have made an excellent effort to reach out and to have a dialogue with people who are involved in nuclear arms control and disarmament. So I want to thank you for that contribution. 

>> Well, I was actually at the 1995 extension conference as well. We had a very proactive group that went out and convinced nations that it was in everybody's interest to indefinitely extend the NPT. So over 15 years...

>> Well, I'll stop there. I'll stop recording, if you don't mind. But thank you very much on behalf of everyone, and I really appreciate this. Thank you.
