Students, welcome to lesson 2A, which I've entitled Nuclear Nightmares. We will be talking a lot this week about nuclear weapons, nuclear proliferation, nuke maps, Hiroshima, Nagasaki, and the possibility of a nuclear war.

Today, I want to remind you that I do not use Proctortrack. So, please do not write me asking if I use Proctortrack. Nor will I be checking—I will not be checking how much time you spend online simply because Brightspace does not record properly the time that is spent online. It is not recorded and I will not pay attention to whether you access the lessons and for how long unless, of course, you get 100% on the exams and then I do a cross-check.

The class is full. Please do not write to me as students are at this very moment, as today is the last day. You cannot skip the queue for any reason. The class was filled a long time ago and I do not control access. I will not write reference letters for anyone in this class due to the nature of an online class. I cannot study your CV and transcript. Otherwise, I would have to write reference letters for everyone in the class. And that would be doing you what's called a disservice. You need a reference letter from a fourth-year professor who knows you, who has heard you, perhaps a third-year professor. I would not be doing you a service by writing you any kind of a reference letter for medical school, law school, or anything like that.

We do not know whether we will have a TA. There are 1,800 students in the class. I do not know whether I will have a TA and their tasks are not clear. I mentioned that because I have programmed the exam and the quiz dates on the course calendar. They are not in the course syllabus. Please do not write me asking me to confirm whether you understand whether the quiz and the exam dates are correct. You can use the chatbot. Please do not write me again, as students are doing, asking me again when the dates are. You are responsible. You're grown up.

New lectures are posted for sure by Thursday each week depending on the guest lectures. Sometimes the guest lectures cancel on me many times. And for example, today I'm early because I did the guest lecture in October. Recording and setting up lectures takes a lot of time. Please be patient and please do not write me every day on Monday asking me when I'm going to post the stuff because your schedule demands that you keep up. I'm trying to keep up too. And so let's just all work together and try to stay positive.

President Putin has delivered, as of January 11th, a warning shot using a nuclear-capable missile and that sent a message to Europe and to Canada and the NATO countries days after they agreed to a post-war security guarantee. And so it's not certain what is going to happen right now. It is particularly interesting because Russia equipped the missile with dummy warheads—they didn't equip it with nuclear warheads—and so without those nuclear warheads, it appears like this Oreshnik missile is technically underwhelming, but it is sending a message.

The message is a warning message. They are saying that they are willing to use an expensive system. They can only produce a small number of those missiles each year. And to use it on Kyiv in an attack confirms that they are trying to say that they want to intimidate Europe and also North America.

Here's some pictures of the Oreshnik missile. And you can see my picture is hiding some of the details of this intermediate-range ballistic missile that can go very quickly. It has the capability of multiple, up to six, nuclear warheads. Mr. Putin therefore is trying to manipulate a sense of nuclear risk, arguably, and we're going to talk a lot about that in this lecture. We're going to start talking about the effects of threats.

Many of us who lived—I didn't myself live through the Cuban Missile Crisis, but many older experts say that our present-day crisis is actually riskier, far more riskier in a multipolar world with many powers having nuclear weapons than it was back in the bilateral world of two superpowers, Russia and the United States. So, we need to think just like the EXCOMM pictured here, the Executive Committee during the Cuban Missile Crisis that advised President Kennedy. We need to think of how to extricate ourselves from this mess that we're in, which could lead to war due to miscalculation, misperception, and misunderstanding—the "three misses."

So, war is folly, and assuredly here's President Zelenskyy and also President Putin. And I'm sure that President Putin is possibly rethinking his initial decision to attack Kyiv in order to topple Volodymyr Zelenskyy's government. He has not been able to do so in nearly five years. He has not been able to liberate the Donbas region by sheer force and by persuasion. They held some referenda in Donetsk, Luhansk, Kherson, and Zaporizhzhia, where the nuclear power plant is, but that will not obscure the reality that Russia's hold over the war-torn region will be tenuous for decades to come because there are so many people who hate Russia, who are of Ukrainian citizenship and descent.

So, here's a picture of the disputed areas and the possibility of a new central force in Europe going along here or here. We're not sure. Now, Russia's already taken here and I'll talk to you about that in the next slide. So, there's Ukraine, Russia, and the neighboring country—Moldova is not part of NATO. Romania and Poland are. I'll talk more about NATO in the weeks to come and especially in lesson 8, but right now we will just be focusing for a few moments on the Crimean Peninsula. The Crimean Peninsula was annexed by Russia in 2014 and that is now under constant threat. Indeed, the Russian submarines are not able to harbor there safely and they're being redeployed up to the Arctic and to the Baltic Sea. I'll show you up north of the Baltic Sea that way. It is currently unknown whether the submarines that sabotaged the Nord Stream 1 and 2 pipelines, possibly in order to force Europe to stop supporting Ukraine. No one really knows who cut those pipelines. NATO is conducting exercises in the Black Sea to protect the ships.

Now, I looked up the notes that are available for you, many, many different notes. Here's a student who has assiduously done 25 pages of written notes on what I said. You could study the 25 pages, but I think it's actually easier and faster just to listen to the lecture once or twice. Some students listen to it twice and not make a whole transcript and study the transcript. The transcript is only necessary if you're going to cheat using ChatGPT and you're going to look up the answers. But there I'm going to foil you again and I'll show you how because I just look and see every time I do the lecture I do different stuff. I say different things here. I'm not saying that today. I haven't said anything about that. I did last year say that it might be the Russians but we don't really know.

So that student's notes, well these are the notes from Chat. So all I did is type in, let's say there was a question that on the multiple choice: "who cut the Nord Stream 1 and Nord Stream 2 pipelines?" You can cheat but then Chat's going to give you a tremendous amount of information that you have to read during a multiple choice exam. Right now nobody knows, no one knows who cut those pipelines, and this is kind of interesting. You can read that but you don't have time during a multiple choice exam.

Okay. As each day passes the nuclear threats Putin has made, of which there are more and more, are veiled in, I would say, grandiosity. But the question is whether deterrence has been weakened or strengthened. And our guest speaker is going to address that. He's going to argue that deterrence has prevented Putin from attacking NATO. Is he right or is he wrong? Let's listen to the guest speaker. Is the threat of an above-ground demonstration shot of a nuclear weapon in Russia's Far East more or less credible? Nobody knows. Opinions vary.

Maybe it is more likely that nuclear weapons would be used today after the attack using a nuclear-capable missile on Kyiv. Or maybe it was more likely in February 2022 when they first invaded Kyiv. Unlikely events happen all the time. They do. And that's my argument, my counterargument to Guy Roberts, is that if a nuclear war was to happen, even though it's an unlikely event, it would lead—it could trigger a nuclear winter.

I'm going to talk more about what all this means in a few minutes. Nuclear threats are always a bluff until the day they are not. And President Putin's aggressive threats lower the threshold for nuclear use. So we'll say: lower the threshold of the ladder of escalation. It makes it more likely that they will escalate. It will increase, it will decrease—the argument goes back and forth, back and forth. But essentially we use the words "escalation" and "threshold." I'm not sure why.

Okay, so the argument's made that winter is always coming and Russia is superior in terms of its chokehold on European gas, which they need in the winter, and also they have superior equipment, training in the Arctic and so on. And that means that they can mobilize more easily. They have a conventional advantage, and that's always the traditional argument that was made, especially in 2022. But now the Ukrainians have received literally billions of dollars of sophisticated weapons. We'll talk more about the kinds of weapons in future weeks, especially when we talk about NATO, but they've received these weapons from Canada, the United States, from all over Europe. And why? Because Europeans are afraid of another World War II, World War I, the horror of mass graves, seeing torture, dead bodies, seeing the use of Russian, even North Korean soldiers and mercenaries, prisoners. This removes the West's reluctance to ratchet up the conflict by filling the Ukrainian war chest.

Okay, so let me explain that further. Here we can see Kim Jong-un of North Korea and the poorly equipped and poorly trained North Korean soldiers being sent to fight—Russia, the ally, North Korea's ally. And there they are being sent off to fight against the Ukrainians as well. The Russians have been using prisoners, their own prisoners, to fight in the first wave that first attacks Ukrainians conventionally. Here in 2022 is Yevgeny Prigozhin and he has since been killed; he was killed in a plane crash, but he did try to—I wrote an entire column on this the day after it happened. It seems like he tried to do a civil overtake of even Moscow, but we don't know. Here's a picture of a Russian prisoner who was deployed on the front, released, and went back home and murdered two more people. So they're using prisoners to fight.

Already this is a war of attrition, and attrition means trying to wear each other down, and experts caution that Putin—kind of like they'll use the term "a desperate cornered rat"—may use nuclear weapons to force the enemy to back down. This is a very popular American argument and it is also part—Americans will always refer to this: "escalating to de-escalate." In fact, Guy Roberts refers to it and then I have to correct him. It's escalating to de-escalate. You shouldn't really correct famous speakers.

The White House's warnings are stark. The people in the United States are stark. Even outgoing US President Biden—when he was outgoing US President—made clear at the UN General Assembly (and there's a link there in the PowerPoint slides to his speech, but you do not need to listen to his speech). That was one of his last speeches at the UN. And what he's saying is that we have to meet these challenges and build a future rhetoric of cooperation.

President Biden's Secretary of State—so this is the first time I introduced the word Secretary of State. We have Minister of Foreign Affairs; they have Secretaries. Okay? So keep that in mind. And they refer to a State Department. So here you have Antony Blinken who was the US Secretary of State. Boy, it would be good to have him as a guest speaker, right? He could come in; he'd be pretty jaundiced and angry. Anyway, he said that they told Moscow that...
Welcome to lesson 2B on nuclear weapons and nuclear proliferation. We will be going through a lot of new terms for you and some of this may be too quick. Those of you that have taken my other courses will be familiar with many of these concepts. First of all, we're going to talk about a multipolar world, many powers, and the problem of nuclear weapon proliferation.

So because of the end of the Cold War, many people think that actually a nuclear exchange is more likely today than it was back in the bipolar world during the Cold War. And that's because of the chance of accidental nuclear war, misperception, miscommunication, misunderstanding, and also the doctrine of nuclear deterrence and preemptive nuclear warfare. Preemptive nuclear warfare.

Given that there were many past nuclear accidents—you can read about failures of communication in 1984 and so on—the chance of a nuclear exchange is higher as more and more countries obtain nuclear weapons. Can you survive a nuclear war? Certainly not. And it is useless to try to read those sort of nuclear war survival skills, building a bunker in your backyard and so on.

Perhaps I put a map here. Many Europeans are worried about a war in Europe. So here's the Baltic countries and Kaliningrad, which belongs to Russia, that has deployed nuclear weapons. Now, the problem is the divide between the nuclear-weapon states that have nuclear weapons, that brandish nuclear weapons, that wave them around as if they're credible and usable without realizing the humanitarian consequences for humans, for human security worldwide because of a nuclear accident or a nuclear war. So they are opposed to the non-nuclear-weapon states, the NNWS, and they are increasingly frustrated with the nuclear-weapon states because of their relatively slow pace of nuclear disarmament since 1945.

Five state parties, members of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, are not part of the NPT. It's a pretty successful treaty when you think about it. It was established back in 1968 and experts predicted that 25 to 30 nuclear-weapon states would happen within 20 years, and that's what did not happen. This means that they did predict what they called a "nuclear jungle" with no overarching power like the UN would happen by around 1988, and that didn't happen. There is no nuclear jungle with no rules right now because, arguably, because of the NPT, the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty review conferences and the regime, and the nuclear taboo which I'll talk about in a few minutes, and because of the international opprobrium about the use of nuclear weapons.

So I put here a picture of Douglas Roche, who was a speaker just recently at my most recent class, and he argued that there would be a nuclear jungle. He's been very strong about the NPT over the years. A retired... established the Middle Power Initiative. And I put here a picture of another diplomat who I invited to the class here. She's the Minister. She was the Ambassador to Iran, but I think she's probably not going to be able to speak because once you are retired, you still have for a few years... you're not allowed to talk about diplomacy. I'm still negotiating with her.

State parties are not part of the NPT and there's five. So the five state parties are India, Israel, Pakistan, and South Sudan—which doesn't have nuclear weapons for sure—and then the DPRK, North Korea, the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. The DPRK acceded, meaning they signed the NPT back in 1985, but they never came into compliance with the safeguards and announced their withdrawal—its withdrawal.

The other problems, and we're going to go through a lot of them now, are the spread of nuclear weapons into space because of the ballistic missile defense program. The Golden Dome—I'll be talking about that. The spread of nuclear weapons under Arctic ice and into oceans, off the coasts, hidden.

The NPT has a review conference about every five years. The next one will be in 2026 because of COVID; it's delayed. These are international and national conferences and it all leads up every five years to the NPT review conference. I'm attending a meeting and I'm hosting meetings and so on to get ready for the NPT review conference in consultations with the Nuclear Arms Control and Disarmament Division of Global Affairs Canada on January 30th. We're all concerned about nuclear weapons spreading into space, into oceans, and also under the ice.

Experts are concerned particularly about the implications of the US Ballistic Missile Defense project, which President Trump has called the Golden Dome. This is a project that's been around for a long time and has great implications for Russia's sense of insecurity and China's nuclear defense posture and implications for space debris out in space.

I'll talk about a lot of these issues, but this is just our sort of 2B and we're trying to get some of the vocabulary about talking about Canada around too. So Canada, Prime Minister Carney has been asked by President Trump to participate in the Golden Dome and they are holding high-level discussions about that right now, whether Canada will join that project which has implications not for just Canada and the Arctic but also for Iran, Ireland—Iran, Ireland too actually, it's a middle power—Greenland and Denmark. Greenland is part of Denmark.

The nuclear weapons operating under the ice—we'll talk about that when we talk about Arctic sovereignty—but they're also a big problem. Although they're contributing to the strategic triad and to stability, they can hover unseen, virtually undetectable for weeks at a time under the Arctic ice—Russians, Americans, and Chinese—or off the coasts, let's say, of the United States.

I have been active for 25 years with the Canadian Pugwash Group. There's a picture of me looking, well, 10 years ago when I was at the NPT. Adele Buckley has died this summer, very sadly. And she was spearheading at the age of 88 a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Arctic. And I worked with her and Roméo Dallaire, the general who opposed the genocide in Rwanda. And I've worked for a long time with Alyn Ware, who just got the alternate Nobel laureate, which is a prize of 50,000 for an alternate peace. President Trump is not asking for that one. Anyway, I've worked with various people on denuclearizing. And if you're interested in helping, we sure need people. There's only a few of us left. In fact, really only very few. We have some money. We have about $10,000 to do a campaign. But I mean, here I am writing an article with Roméo Dallaire. And see the picture they put of the snake with the tip of the snake, which is an ICBM over the Arctic. I thought it was a cool picture to show you.

Okay, so the United States, the United Kingdom, and the Soviet Union—now called Russia—emerged as victors. They were victorious from World War II. And the NPT enshrines their right to openly possess nuclear weapons. They possessed nuclear weapons at the time that the NPT was signed back in 1968. So the treaty acknowledges their nuclear status, but it is not a formal approval for them holding nuclear weapons. So they're called the "Big Three." So the great powers, the Big Three: the United States, Russia, and China. Those are the Big Three.

The Big Five are also the United Kingdom—which includes Scotland, Wales, and England—and also France, a unitary state. Those five have veto power in the United Nations General Assembly... which you just saw me pictured at 15 years ago. No, 10 years ago. At the most successful—that was the most successful. That's why I was looking so happy. We just succeeded in getting 64 planks for the NPT review conference. But all that has gone by the wayside now. Diplomacy is so despairing.

I put a woman here shaking her head because so many students of mine have written, when I used to teach in person, essays on reforming the UN Security Council, reforming the UN General Assembly. I think I've read hundreds of essays on that and all of those people—I don't know where they are, teachers, diplomats now—but nothing has happened. So the assumption then was having nuclear weapons equates to veto power. But that would mean that if other non-nuclear-weapon states like, let's say in alphabetical order always so as not to give priority, Germany, Japan, Nigeria, and South Africa could wield the veto power eventually—unlikely. But if you are interested, I did do a reading course on the United Nations Security Council reform two years ago for Jasdeep Sidhu and there's a supplementary lecture on how to be an excellent student that you can listen to with Jas on that if you want, and other students obviously.

Okay. So, North Korea has continually fired rockets—not yet with nuclear weapons on them—and since 2016 and it has said that it has a hydrogen bomb. It conducted it in 2016. I showed you a picture of Kim Jong-un. He is Russia's close ally now and is sending prisoners to fight against Ukraine. I was in South Korea here in the Demilitarized Zone and saw all these tunnels and was in Seoul. So here there's the partition line. There's the line between North and South Korea. So I looked this way into North Korea.

Okay. So we mentioned that North Korea is not part of the NPT and we mentioned that there are negotiations through the NPT review conference, but the whole process is really deadlocked because of the existence of the arsenal of the P5. The P5, the Permanent Five, the five that I talked about—the three and the two. The United States and Russia have the most nuclear weapons, but bilateral arms negotiations concerning their relatively larger arsenals are going too slowly according to the non-nuclear-weapon states. And that's very true. President Trump just recently said that they will not renew the New START in February, next month, because the negotiations are just not working and he thinks he can start the negotiations again. So here you see all these old men negotiating.

Okay. Diplomats still argue. We argue vehemently about this. People that are involved in this like Ambassador Peggy Mason, who I tried to get to speak to our UN class—I'm still working on that. Ernie Regehr, who just got the Canadian Peace Prize. They argue... I listened to them in October argue for one full hour about a certain article and about whether it was diplomatic to criticize other countries or not. One full hour in front of a big audience. We were all kind of wondering like, wow, if they're arguing—these two are on the same side—then imagine how much the Russians and the North Koreans would be arguing.

Anyway, we talk a lot about Article VI and good faith and so on, but I talk a lot about NATO's Strategic Concept. So, I'm considered to be an expert on NATO. I've written many, many articles on NATO. Just type in "Erica Simpson NATO." I've written a book on NATO and the Bomb, but anyway, NATO Strategic Concept is non-binding. It's a document they issue over and over again, and the basic language of it is always the same.

There's Guy Roberts. Guy Roberts, the person who I interviewed here for a class. There he is much younger, probably 20 years ago. And Jamie Shea, who I interviewed, the longest-serving diplomat at NATO. I've interviewed him three times. He just retired. I interviewed him on his last day, on his last afternoon, which was a great interview. They always say the same thing: the supreme guarantee of the allies, that the French and the UK nuclear weapons are a contribution to their overall deterrence and security. So now I'm bringing up this word: don't be afraid of "deterrence." So NATO Strategic Concept says as long as nuclear weapons exist, NATO will remain a nuclear alliance, which basically means forever.

Okay. So there's mounting nuclear arsenals and modernization. And now I'm going to start talking about modernization and negative and positive security assurances. So I'm not going to get too much into this. Negative assurances mean that you can threaten a country that's not part of the NPT. So for example, you could threaten the DPRK. Right now Putin and Trump are threatening everyone. And I'll talk about that in lesson C. But positive security assurances reassure a country that has signed the NPT, or any other guarantee, that it is committed to defending. So that's what Ukraine wants. It wants a positive security assurance to say that they will be defended in case of an attack. Here we're talking about it in the context of a nuclear attack.

So that's why Japan does not need yet to come out and say they're going to develop their own nuclear weapons. There is Paul Meyer, whom I'm meeting with next week, who's the former Ambassador to the Conference on Disarmament. Kim Campbell, the former Prime Minister of Canada, the only female. Doug Roche. And then Jonathan Granoff, the President of the Global Security Institute, whom I interviewed for my other class. So some of you will have heard a lot about nuclear weapons if you're taking all three of my classes. But that's good because that's important. So is climate change.

Okay, I mentioned to you Paul Meyer. Paul Meyer mourns this terribly. He was a diplomat for years at the conference and he always brings up in his speeches—if you heard him in my other class—that they're deadlocked and they have not done anything for decades. He gets quite uptight about it. That's because the NPT has many loopholes, ways to get around it despite the additional protocols and so on. Merely the fact that it almost condones Iran's pursuit of nuclear energy. Iran has tons of oil. Why does Iran need nuclear energy? It has tons and tons of oil. But anyway, the NPT is not really able to cope with North Korea, Syria possibly having nuclear weapons in the long run, Saudi Arabia, and other mounting arsenals outside the NPT framework. It's an older treaty and it's difficult.

Now Canada actually helped to establish the Global Partnership Program and we're very proud of that and we've spent billions on it. I'm going to Ottawa at the end of the month for the nuclear arms control disarmament discussions. I'm invited as an expert and believe me I know they will be talking with a whole PowerPoint program for one hour about the Global Partnership Program and how they have contributed to it. Russia has canceled its participation. It doesn't want its sovereignty undermined. And poorly paid Russian soldiers and so on continue to be a problem because they could sell nuclear material on the black market.

Okay. So the Global Partnership Program deals with trained physicists, trying to pay them, and skilled nuclear workers in Russia and soldiers. And that's a long-term concern and the United States and Canada together have spent literally billions and billions of dollars on that. It's a very important program. According to Senator Richard Lugar, more such partners are needed worldwide concerning other nuclear powers, but there are none.

Okay. So a tactical nuclear war would cause nuclear winter and famine. I mentioned this before and now I want to go through these slides which show you global warming due to the industrial revolution and so on. And then that's global cooling because of a regional nuclear war using approximately 100 nuclear weapons. Now if they were to use more nuclear weapons then there would be a global cooling of minus 4 degrees around the world, let's say, because of using their high-alert nuclear weapons. And then this was what we envision could happen during the Cold War where they used all of their nuclear weapons, the global nuclear arsenal, and then you would also have a nuclear winter.

So that's global warming since 1880. And you can see that a nuclear winter would cool down the whole earth considerably. Here's the view of the Apollo 10 view of the Earth in 1969 from 26,000 nautical miles and you can see Mexico there. And that's what the world would look like after a large-scale nuclear holocaust. And you can see the clouds of smoke and resulting fires would essentially cover the entire Northern Hemisphere and also all the way down to New Zealand within two weeks.

So the problem is, let's say there was a local regional war between—just for example—between India and Pakistan. They each have approximately 150 nuclear weapons approximately. India is going to obtain more nuclear weapons soon but I'll talk about that in a minute. So here what we see is, let's say they used 100 Hiroshima-size nuclear weapons, or 0.05% of all the US-Russian deployed weapons approximately—used somewhere around the world, 0.05%. Then there would be millions of tons of smoke rising into the stratosphere and global temperatures would drop to what they were 10,000 years ago, to Little Ice Age levels. 25 to 40% of the ozone around the world would be destroyed at the mid latitudes and 50 to 70% would be destroyed at northern high latitudes.

Okay. So here you can see, let's say there was a nuclear war with just 100 Hiroshima-size nuclear weapons. This is how the earth would cool over a period of two weeks. So you can see the temperature is dropping all around the world. I'm covering New Zealand, but eventually New Zealand will also freeze and there would be worldwide famine. The entire global economy would completely collapse. Billions of people would die of starvation within a few weeks, if not for certain a few months. And there you are. So, we'll just let that run for a few minutes to absorb the impact and the recognition that where my red laser dot is is where I am right now. And you can see the temperature is just continually dropping into a nuclear winter, even if it's summer.

Okay, moving on. So, there's the change in average surface temperatures two years after an India-Pakistan nuclear war. And you can see the temperature has dropped by around 1.5 degrees in Toronto and then it's also dropped all around the world here. You can't quite see Australia and New Zealand. It's dropped around particularly in the Northern Hemisphere. That doesn't mean you should try to move to New Zealand. You can't escape it.

Here's the changes in global precipitation. So you can see that it's a drought. There's not much... anyway, it's just extremely concerning.

Okay. What about would there be a nuclear winter from the use of loose nukes and dirty bombs? No. They think that the damage would be... it depends where. If it was in New York City it would obviously damage and kill millions of people. But a dirty bomb, let's say smuggled from Canada in kitty litter across into New York City or Washington... the main issue there is people would flee to 27 cities all around the United States. They would flee out of the cities into the country for days at a time; they wouldn't come back into their cities. So this is called nuclear terrorism and Graham Allison, who's a famous writer about the Cuban Missile Crisis, has written a lot about that. But a dirty bomb is not as big a concern as tactical or strategic or hydrogen nuclear weapons.

Okay. So this leads me to talk about the problem of nuclear waste, which will remain dangerous for literally hundreds of thousands of years. The radiation reduces over thousands of years. But until we figure out what to do with the nuclear waste—the high-level rods and the low-level and intermediate-level nuclear waste—then we have a problem. Nuclear terrorists could perhaps capture the trucks and so on that are carrying nuclear waste. And nuclear waste right now is stored above ground. There's no working underground depository anywhere in the world. Finland's working on one and Canada has some proposals. I'll talk to you about that.

But here's the Bruce Power nuclear reactor, which is on the shore of Lake Huron up north of Goderich in Kincardine. And these could be soft targets for their nuclear... and so they are surrounded... I've visited it. It's surrounded with barbed wire and security guards and protected by the IAEA, the International Atomic Energy Agency. But I'm well known for arguing that it's a threat, a terrorist threat.

And Canada's proposed... there's some proposals. This I could talk for an hour on this one single slide, but essentially there's been a few proposals and the current proposals are to build a nuclear waste site 46 km away from the Bruce reactor. And then another one up in Ignace. And so one is called Ignace and the other one is called Teeswater. Now down here, this is a—I mentioned there's no real depository. This is an artist's rendition of one that they could have built in Yucca Mountain in Nevada, but that was rejected by President Obama and then President Trump started that process again and he's considering it and so on. They need to do something with their waste. They may look up north to Canada and say, "Oh, we should use Canada."

Okay? So, I'm a critic of the two sites and so I'm very aware of the fact... I don't want to bias you against it. So, for example, this picture could be seen as biasing you because there's: Lake Huron, how far away is the site, and so on. Is it limestone, and so on? So, these are some questions that are being asked. So, where is it? It's right there on the shore of the Great Lakes, the largest freshwater reserve in the world. And there you can see 30 km. So it would be around here close to Kincardine, the one 46 km away from Douglas Point, from the many reactors here. This is the largest operating nuclear reactor in the world. There's different reactors in here. So right now they're burying the waste here above ground at the Western Waste Management Facility, but the proposal is to take all of Canada's waste—the low and intermediate level—and put it here.

Now, of course, the people in Ignace are opposed. Many people are opposed to having the nuclear waste from Pickering and Darlington and from Quebec and from New Brunswick all trucked up to their tiny area. Particularly First Nations are opposed. So, the Nuclear-Free North... there's information. They have the best website on trying to figure out this issue. I highly recommend this one run by Brennain Lloyd if you want to learn.

So this is the only map I could find, and of course it was on their website. So there's all the proposed transportation of the nuclear waste. There would be... I think it was... I can't quite remember but the estimate is that there would be, for 30 years, 50 trucks. I don't want to say it because... and I don't want to say what their estimate is because it's so incredibly concerning about accidents and so on. And this road is... you've driven... I've driven this road. This is essentially a two-lane highway and in the winter it is very difficult. It's also crossing many First Nations. So if you want to get involved, take a look at that site.

The decision will be made in the next few years, mainly this year, and that leads me to talk about dismantled nuclear weapons and waste. So the NPT allows countries to develop nuclear energy. Iran has the right to develop its own nuclear energy. So at the same time we're kind of preserving the NPT and saying you can have your own nuclear energy. Something has to be done with the nuclear waste from dismantled nuclear bombs and from nuclear power planes—plants that have to be decommissioned over time.

The fact that the United States at the same time is modernizing its nuclear weapons. This is the whole nuclear modernization debate that Guy Roberts actually spearheaded. And that's the idea. And it's interesting because in this unit he refers to it all. In the first one he talks about it and the necessity of it and so on. But now, despite the cost of modernization being in the tens of billions, that's not his main concern. The threat is coming from other countries.

Okay. So what is the debate? The debate about the B-61 bomber here is whether these five countries in NATO in Europe should continue to host the United States nuclear weapons. And Russia points to that and says, "Well, we're going to put nuclear weapons in Kaliningrad because you have these tactical nuclear weapons in Germany, the United States, the United Kingdom, and Turkey." I talked to the mayor—not of Italy, but of Turkey once. I sat beside him at a conference and he was just so appalled that his own village was what he called a soft site, a soft target; that his own village would be wiped out because it was hosting these secret nuclear weapons.

I could get into this more, but Russia is revitalizing its Arctic bases. It's moving into the Arctic and it's refusing to negotiate about its advantage in tactical nuclear weapons. It has more tactical nuclear weapons than the United States. Russia is deploying nuclear weapons in the Arctic and it's dumping its waste, its nuclear waste, into rivers and frozen rivers in the Arctic. Meanwhile, the United State Department is maintaining that Russia is not willing to negotiate tactical nuclear weapons. And that's true. The Russians are saying that at the heart of this is the BMD issue and that that is the problem, the Golden Dome. And then President Trump is saying it's not worth keeping START. It's not worth renegotiating it. So in February of 2026, when New START collapses possibly, there will be no arms trade—there will be no more bilateral arms control—and that we will only have the NPT. That will be the only thing left. And the Outer Space Treaty too actually, if you... it's still there.

China's building its own modernized strategic triad. We'll talk more about China in future weeks and lessons. And other countries like France and Israel are refusing to talk publicly about their nuclear arsenal. This is called nuclear ambiguity. India is going to acquire... well it looks like Canada's uranium, a $3.9 billion deal.

So to end here on this part, lesson 2B, I read a lot of op-eds. I just wrote one with Dr. Gordon Edwards, the President of the Canadian Coalition for Nuclear Responsibility, about the implications for the NPT and also for transporting nuclear waste across Canada and the implications of those two dialogues, and the fact that we need to talk more openly about this. And that was in the Globe and Mail, which you don't have a subscription to—neither do I—but you can get it through the university through PressReader. So that was there and I just wanted to put that as a final kind of slide to tell you just how important I feel that this...
Okay, welcome to our last lecture before the guest speaker on nuclear weapons and the nuke map. Here's a picture of Hiroshima in 1945. I was there recently and it has regrown. The trees are back and so on, but there are many memorials and there is a museum which is well worth seeing.

Here's a picture from a credible authority, the Federation of American Scientists. Matt Korda is actually now located in Toronto, working online, and they use satellites. They use online and free accessible information to try to figure out the global nuclear warhead inventories around the world. So, they're considered to be incredibly credible. This is 2023 and they're saying that Israel has approximately 90 nuclear weapons. They don't know for certain, but that's what they're confirming. China, back then a year ago, had 410.

Here are some estimates from another American think tank called the Arms Control Association. Also very credible. Its founder, Daryl Kimball, raises money and they do their own estimates. So here you can see that in 2025, they're estimating that China has close to 600 nuclear weapons—a large jump which concerns many people around the world.

The other things that we refer to are "the bomb." "The bomb" is popular jargon. I wrote a book, *NATO and the Bomb*. "Hiroshima Day" is another popular term for commemorating Hiroshima and Nagasaki. The nuke map, we're referring to nuclear weapons or the missile map—these are popular websites that show you the impact of different types of bombs on cities like your own. Let's look for example.

Here, I put in London, Ontario. If it was hit by the first Hiroshima bomb—the small tactical weapon called Little Boy—it would kill approximately 263,000 people and there would be 512,000 injuries. So this is a very, very small tactical nuclear weapon.

Here, I put in London again, and now hitting it with a Russian bomb, which is a megaton bomb. And the fatalities are going all the way up to northern Ontario, with the estimated fatalities here of 435,000 and many, many more injuries. It would be impossible to cope with that many injuries.

Here, I put in Sudbury, close to Ignace, where the high-level intermediate nuclear waste site would be. So let's say that in a preemptive attack, Russia was to attack that with a very, very crude nuclear weapon—very, very crude, some terrorists or something. The fatalities are low because there's not that many people up in that area, and the injuries are low. But that's just from a small, let's say, "dirty bomb."

Here, more seriously, is a North Korean weapon tested in 2017. So they at that time said they couldn't reach the West Coast of the United States. They boast that they can now reach that far with their intercontinental ballistic missiles. And that's one of the reasons that people are talking about ballistic missile defense and a project in space to shoot down a single weapon like this. So, I put here the effect on Vancouver and you can see it's stretching all the way into North Vancouver, Richmond, Surrey, Burnaby and so on. The number of estimated casualties as well as injuries is very, very high—impossible to cope with at that point.

So in 2025, we commemorated the 80th anniversary of the use of atomic weapons over Japan. In 1945, a small 14-kiloton uranium bomb—carrying uranium, not plutonium—exploded at Hiroshima on August 6th, 1945. And then a plutonium bomb was dropped on August 9th, three days later, on Nagasaki. It killed between—the estimates are—129,000 and 226,000 people in total. So, we don't know the numbers that were killed in Hiroshima and Nagasaki accurately, but around that many people.

Here's the picture of the second-to-last survivor who lived in Canada, protected by his mother. So he was a very young baby, and he was killed by a drunk driver in Ottawa actually a few years ago. He was a very active Hibakusha. These are the people who are the survivors of Hiroshima and Nagasaki; they're called the Hibakusha.

Debates continue to this day about whether the bombings—whether not bombing Hiroshima and Nagasaki would have led to the surrender eventually of Japan or of the Emperor. There's no doubt that tens of thousands of Japanese civilians—and this is the use of nuclear weapons against civilians—were intentionally targeted from just two small detonations.

The International Court of Justice, in a legal international legal opinion, determined there exists an obligation to pursue in good faith and bring to a conclusion negotiations leading to nuclear disarmament. So here's a picture of the Bulletin... the atomic clock. It's still standing and it's also a memorial. You can go there and visit. Very moving. This is the river where hundreds of people fled down to the river burning up. And it's a very moving place to go.

I am a board member of many different organizations to do with nuclear weapons, to do with abolishing nuclear weapons, to say "no" to nuclear war. It's kind of what I've worked on for 30 years now. And so I'm part of the Canadian Network to Abolish Nuclear Weapons, on the board, and I'm also the president of the Canadian Peace Research Association. I've been a board member for a very long time of the Canadian Pugwash group. So I put the links in there; you'd have to go to the PowerPoint to link them. If you are interested in joining those organizations, students are always very, very welcome.

And that leads me to talk about the number of nuclear weapons that are remaining, which is around 12,500 or 13,000—you could argue 13,000—more than 90% belonging to Russia and the United States. And that's the serious thing here: this is a problem between the two superpowers and their bombs, some of which are in the megaton range. Their hydrogen bombs are thousands of times more lethal than tactical nuclear weapons.

Across the world, commemorative events are held every year to remind us of the terrible cost and the ongoing danger of the nuclear arms race, the modernization, and the impact of a limited nuclear missile exchange. Yet, the nine official and unofficial nuclear arms states are intent on rebuilding, modernizing, and retaining their nuclear warheads.

President Vladimir Putin's frequent references to the possible use of nuclear weapons seems to be leading to apathy. People don't seem to be able to do anything because they're terrified or they're just staying very quiet. I'm not sure. Are they fearful? We don't know a lot about nuclear weapons because they are a legacy of the last century, during the Cold War.

This year, the hands of the *Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists* Doomsday Clock now, as of February, point to 90 seconds to midnight. I don't know what they will be this coming February, but essentially they're moving them closer and closer to midnight. Midnight is global annihilation, extinction of the human species, the planet a rock in space with nothing on it. So, we have to obviously think about that and collectively take action. How you do that is up to you. But I think arguing for "no first use" in the United States is very popular—arguing that there should be no preemptive use of nuclear weapons. Currently, the United States and Russia do not have a "no first use" policy; China does. We could also follow in the steps of the United States and argue for de-alerting nuclear warheads. Some organizations are doing that, but there are American organizations ending "launch on warning" policies and so on. These are not substitutes for bringing about the kind of world that would be stable, that would not need nuclear weapons, because the genie is out of the bottle. Nuclear knowledge is here to stay. So we need deeper structural ways to solve conflict and to work toward peace on Earth.

Here in Canada, the government is not engaged in discussions about the TPNW or about sending observers. I'll be in Ottawa soon and we'll be making the same arguments that we always do: that we need to send observers to the TPNW, that we need to strengthen our stand at the NPT, and that we need to propose an NWC—a Nuclear Weapons Convention. The BWC (Biological Weapons Convention), the Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention, and the Chemical Weapons Convention are examples of what we can do. So these are a lot of acronyms, a lot of words, and that is how everyone talks. So I need to train you; I'm trying to train you to talk about all sorts of things, like trade and so on. I'm working toward that. This class is very focused on NATO and on President Trump's new ideas, like a "golden dome" in space. We talk a lot about nuclear arms control and disarmament in this lesson. And obviously, I think there should be more parliamentary debate. We'll talk more about how you can write a parliamentary resolution and what you can do to advance your goals and what you think is important. Obviously, I think nuclear abolition is important.

The janitor has started to wash the floor outside my office even though I have signs up. No, she's going to wash the floor. Okay, that's fine. I love her. Rosa—let's go talk to Rosa. No, I can't stop. Professor Simpson has argued—and I can't stop because I've argued for 30 years—that we need to undertake a leadership role within NATO toward creating the conditions for a world free of nuclear weapons, and Canada should spearhead a comprehensive re-examination of NATO's reliance on nuclear deterrence. So this is what I work on as a professor. I think there needs to be a rejection of deterrence. And that's why it's such an honor for me to have Guy Roberts speak to my class. He and I have been arguing about this at NATO headquarters since 2006. We're good friends. Even though we disagree, we're very, very good friends.

Abolition, I agree, will never happen in a strategic vacuum. I'm the first to say that it will take generations and generations to build a durable security framework based upon the principles of common security and sustainable peace in order to prevent future nuclear breakouts and arms races, including in space.

Europeans are encouraging their governments to take lead roles as part of the Stockholm Initiative. This is a multilateral forum that was established in 2019. It's not really going anywhere; it's working to try to strengthen the NPT. There's a picture of the UN General Assembly. We'll talk more about the UN.

And then finally, the Japanese survivors like Setsuko Thurlow—they believe that another future is possible. In the words of Beatrice Fihn, when they got the Nobel Peace Prize, "Ours is the only reality that is possible. The alternative is unthinkable." So you know, we have no choice. We have to work toward a world that is free of nuclear weapons.

Many people would like a Nobel Peace Prize, including President Trump. Here's a letter that I received yesterday from Setsuko Thurlow, the only surviving Hibakusha in her late 80s. She's asking me for my advice about some American who wants her to be one of the nominators of a guy, Mr. Meyer, and she hasn't heard of him. So she's asking me if I've heard of his good work. And then I wrote her yesterday, "You know, you don't need to reply or engage unless you have known the person." So, she wrote that letter back. I'm just pointing out to you that people are trying to get Nobel Peace Prizes for all sorts of things. But what about ending war?

And that leads me to end my part on whether nuclear weapons could be used in this century—not the last century, but now. And that leads me to talk about Mr. Trump, because he has now said on January 10th, 2026, "I don't need international law." He says power is constrained by his own morality. Now, he has on record said that he wants nuclear weapons to be more usable. And then he's also said he's afraid of nuclear war. Everything is a little bit contradictory. We're not sure what he thinks, right? But he knows that morality—the only thing that can stop him—is his own morality.

So this *New York Times* interview has gone all around the world. It was published on January 7th, and he said, "There's one thing: my own morality, my own mind. The only thing that can stop me." Kind of strange in terms of the limits on his international power. "I don't need international law. I'm not looking to hurt people," he's saying. So, this follows the United States attacks on seven countries in 2025. I looked for a map and the only map I could find was from Al Jazeera News picturing all the attacks in 2025.

Here's the US attack in Venezuela just recently. Here's another attack on Yemen—on the Houthis and Yemen destruction. Another attack on Syria. Here's Pete Hegseth, the Minister of War—I always call him "Minister of War." Here are the US strikes in Somalia. Here are the US strikes in Nigeria. So, I haven't put grizzly pictures of the effect, but if you are from Nigeria and you're in this class, why not come and talk to me? Maybe we can do a Zoom if you have experience or if you've seen anything like this.

If you're a student from Iraq or from Iran, why don't you contact me by email and maybe we can have some sort of a supplementary discussion. This is where the United States eliminated an ISIS leader, but then also they've been attacked. Americans have been attacked all over the place as well, so it's not like a one-way thing. This is the US attacks on nuclear sites in Iran, which I brought up in our first part in 2A. So they've attacked the nuclear facilities.

We will discuss when we cover NATO in Lesson 8, after the spring break, that President Trump is also threatening to take Greenland "the hard way." I'm not sure what "the hard way" means, but it is imperialism when you're saying that you can dominate other countries whether they like it or not. That goes against UN international law, the UN General Assembly, and so on. And he's spoken again about taking over Greenland on January 9th. I don't know by Lesson 8 what will have happened.

By Lesson 10, which will be for the final exam, we will be talking about Arctic sovereignty. And I want to conclude our series here by mentioning that for that class, I interviewed Arctic explorers who had actually kayaked across Baffin Island and gone toward Greenland. So they speak at length—before all these threats—about what this area is like, Arctic sovereignty, and the effect of climate change. They were on a wooden sailboat in Vancouver when I interviewed them. This is a very popular video. There's some minor concerns—basically they both were drinking wine, it was late for them, and they encountered a nuclear submarine off Victoria and so on. So it's an exciting interview. I don't want to necessarily delete it, but things will change by Lesson 10. We may be talking about some kind of an annexation of Greenland, in which case I'm thinking about interviewing a professor, Rob Hubert, who in the media is always put there to oppose me, just like Guy Roberts, and he's willing to come to the class and talk for 20 minutes. Okay, thanks for listening.

Cleaned Transcript 2D: c:\Users\krock\OneDrive\Desktop\throw\cleaned\w2\2D.txt

Hi everyone. I'm very happy to introduce to you two experts on deterrence, but really we're going to focus on Guy Roberts today. I want to introduce him at length, and so I will share a screen and that will help you to understand his background. 

Guy, I assume you can see the words. So Guy Roberts is an esteemed American government official, lawyer, and retired United States Marine Corps colonel. He served as the US Assistant Secretary of Defense for Nuclear, Chemical, and Biological Defense Programs from 2017 to 2019. He was appointed on November 3rd, 2017, during the first Trump administration. Mr. Roberts was the principal advisor to the Secretary of Defense—in the United States, that is the same as Canada's Minister of Defense—the Deputy Secretary of Defense, and the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics on matters concerning nuclear, chemical, and biological defense programs. In his role as the Assistant Secretary of Defense for nuclear, chemical, and biological weapons, Mr. Roberts was responsible for ensuring the safety, security, and effectiveness of the US nuclear deterrent. He led efforts to counter threats from improvised and weapons of mass destruction, including their effects and proliferation. His work was pivotal in maintaining robust defense mechanisms against such threats and ensuring the Department of Defense's compliance with nuclear policies and regulations. Throughout his tenure in the Trump administration and at NATO headquarters in Brussels, Mr. Roberts emphasized the importance of strategic deterrence in national defense and global security. His leadership and expertise significantly contributed to strengthening the United States' defense posture, safeguarding the nation, and addressing the evolving challenges posed by nuclear, chemical, and biological threats.

So I'm very happy to welcome Guy Roberts, and I'm also going to introduce to you one member in the audience, Robin Collins, who is the secretary to the Canadian Pugwash Group, which is part of the international conferences of the Pugwash movement. 

Okay, thank you, Guy. If you would like to see—

>> I would like to go ahead and start, I guess.

>> Yes. Yeah. Just go ahead and we have about 15 minutes.

>> Okay. Well, thank you very much, Erica, for that introduction. I know we've known each other for quite a while and shared many, many views, and most of them diametrically opposed in some respects. But the one thing I always say when I start talking about these issues is that no matter what your position is on deterrence or nuclear disarmament, we all want the same thing: we would all like a peaceful, secure, war-free world. It's just that we're coming from different poles, I guess you could say. 

I'm often reminded of the speech President Obama gave when he accepted the Nobel Peace Prize. What he said there is that we cannot stand idly by in the face of threats. For make no mistake, evil does exist in the world, and sometimes force is necessary. And in 45 years of doing this, I can absolutely vouch for that. We're even seeing that today. And it really gets back to: how do we confront evil? Vice President Cheney said, "We don't negotiate with evil; we defeat it." Unfortunately, we have a president now who believes that he can negotiate a land-for-deal transactional deal with an "evil empire," characterized by an evil man in my view: Vladimir Putin.

And that's diametrically opposed to history. In 45 years of dealing with this issue, we've seen that in spades. All you have to do is look at what's going on right now in the Ukrainian war, where Putin is the prima facie case of a war criminal committing it seems like every single law of war violation there is. He's managed to do it. We've got human trafficking, we've got drugs—you name it. And how do you deal with that? How do you face up to that?

One of the challenges in the non-proliferation world is the fact that some 24 or 25 agreements that we would characterize as non-proliferation or arms control agreements, every single one of them Russia has violated. I would commend our students to the State Department's compliance report on treaties that they publish every year. The latest one again documents in great detail all of the violations that the Russians have made with regard to their arms control agreements.

It's—and so now you're faced with: how do you deal with a country that refuses to comply with its international legal obligations?

The other challenge again with the Russian invasion of Ukraine is the assault on sovereignty by Russia, but broader, the assault on and the destruction of the rules-based international legal order that we've lived under for 80 years and has brought in an unparalleled history of growth, economic growth, expansion, and development that, as I said, is unparalleled. 

And now we have an individual that seeks to destroy that, to go back to the great power competition that we've seen prior to World War II. And all of that great power competition has resulted in two world wars. World War I, some 25 million people died. In World War II, estimates vary, but 50 million plus died as a result of that war. And oh, by the way, there were no nuclear weapons in either one of those cases. But we haven't seen any great power war since the end of World War II, which ended with the dropping of two nuclear weapons.

So we look at that and we're faced with—well, the dropping of these bombs raises profound ethical and moral questions that are hotly debated to this day. Many of those debates are in Pugwash and other forums. But there is the fact that we have seen no great power war since World War II. And no nuclear weapons have been used since August 1945. 

Which would suggest that deterrence is an effective policy. You know, we can debate that, and we do debate that. But, you know, the opponents of nuclear deterrence argue that strategy of war prevention that relies on the threat of nuclear annihilation is incompatible with moral and legal principles, such as proportionality and the protection of non-combatants in war. But nevertheless, although we may have this sword of Damocles hanging over our head, we haven't had any wars like that. In fact, the number of people dying from wars has dropped precipitously since the end of World War II. So these color everything that we talk about. 

And you know, in 45 years of dealing with these issues, I thought I would never see the wars that we have fought in Europe today. It's very disturbing and it's very challenging, and frankly, it's frightening. The only thing that seems to have worked is to confront evil and to make it clear that in their cost-benefit analysis of whether to go to war or not, it always comes out against them. So that they decide, when they wake up every morning and look around, they say, "Well, not today. We're not going to fight today because to do so would be catastrophic and we would be destroyed if we did that." 

But nevertheless, it's useful that we have a continued debate and proposals that come up. I'm going to make one proposal that I think would, in fact, push the game further ahead. 

First of all, one of the things that has been touted, so to speak, is the nuclear ban treaty. I did want to say that that is something that people were hopeful of, but of course none of the nuclear weapons states have signed onto the treaty. So it kind of sits out there. And the challenges there are multiple, and there haven't been any really concrete alternatives that someone could point to to say, "Well, this would substitute for the challenges of maintaining strategic stability and security."

The first question, of course, is: will it improve global security and stability, or will it undermine it? If you have a treaty like that that takes nuclear weapons out of the picture, what will replace it? Because it has proven to be something that has brought strategic stability, although a very dangerous one, I admit that. 

The second question is: will it build a coalition for disarmament or fracture the international community? Does it split it up in the sense that there may be countries that think that now that there are no nuclear weapons, we can pursue our hegemonic aspirations or claims of more territory, or challenge the very sovereignty of a nation in violation of Article 2(4) of the UN Charter? And those are questions that are left out there in various proposals that circulate to deal with that. 

Third point: will a nuclear ban treaty lead to real reductions in nuclear weapons, or would it be a treaty really for political or non-practical effect? What does nuclear abolition really mean? Frankly, there's no way to walk this dog back. That is: can we eliminate the knowledge about nuclear weapons? You can go on the internet and you can find out how to build a nuclear weapon. And if you manage to get your hands on fissile material—Uranium-235 or Plutonium—then all of the information is right there. And with enough resources, you can eventually build yourself an improvised nuclear device that would have devastating effect. How do you get rid of that? 

And that leads to a final question, and that is: how can such a treaty be verified? There are multiple pathways to acquire that. One example is the A.Q. Khan network. A.Q. Khan was the father of the Pakistani nuclear weapon. He stole a lot of the design things when he was a student. He developed a broad, vast network which he used selling nuclear technology and nuclear information to the highest bidder. We only found out about it when we intercepted a ship transporting nuclear materials and equipment to Libya. And to this day, we don't know the extent of that. And just recently, a member of the Yakuza, the Japanese mafia group, was arrested for offering to sell nuclear materials to the highest bidder. We did not know anything about that until there was an international trafficking interdiction effort made. 

So how do you deal with that? And when you do find—this is critical—finding is one thing, verifying is another, and then enforcing is another thing. How do you enforce such a treaty when a program is state-sponsored and there are many countries that are "virtual" nuclear weapons states? Germany is a virtual nuclear weapon state. Japan could potentially be a nuclear weapon state. They have the plutonium. They have the intercontinental ballistic missile capabilities. They have the infrastructure. All they lack is the political will to do so. 

One of the challenges that Putin has thrown down at us is his claim that they have new nuclear weapons that aren't governed by any treaty and that he would potentially use them against various states that impede his aspiration to build a new Russian empire. I'm sure there are many people in Ukraine to this day who rue the day that they gave up their nuclear weapons. At one point right after the collapse of the Soviet Union, Ukraine was the third largest nuclear weapons state. They gave up those nuclear weapons on promises from Russia, the UK, and the US that their territorial integrity and sovereignty would remain intact. Those promises, of course, were very quickly abandoned by Russia. So that's a really big challenge.

Which leads me to what I would like to suggest: one of the ways forward and one of the things that students can get involved in. One of the challenges is to have a dialogue between those that believe in nuclear deterrence and believe in its importance in maintaining peace—that is, avoiding conflict by great powers—and those that advocate, irrespective of the political situation, disarmament for disarmament's sake. I found that it's very difficult for those two particular groups to get together and have a dialogue. It's always been useful for me to talk with you, Erica, about these issues and at least understand what positions you're coming from. I think that's very, very important. 

I'm happy to say that over the last year or so, the State Department has come up with a program to do just that. They call it their "Creating an Environment for Nuclear Disarmament" (CEND) initiative. I don't know if you've heard of that, but this is an initiative in which they want to bring people from all walks of life and all advocates for different things to have a dialogue and try to build a step-by-step approach to where we end up with that happy day where we no longer need nuclear weapons to be part of our national security strategy.

But again, because of what Russia has done and what we're seeing going on with a peer competitor, China, rapidly building their nuclear weapon program—that is a very big challenge. And so I would ask that you take a look at that State Department program and you could reach out to them about participating in their efforts. 

Just a real quick word about US deterrence policy. Again, there's a lot of misinformation and disinformation out there. One of them is that the United States is part of an arms race. Well, the only thing the United States is doing is modernizing—with one exception—modernizing their current nuclear arsenal. They're not building up to anything more. Not, of course, like China, who's rapidly building up. Estimates vary, but soon they will have well over 400 intercontinental ballistic missile sites in their country, and they've got, of course, submarines carrying ballistic missiles and they're developing a bomber to do the same thing. And Russia has developed a whole cadre of new weapon systems that, again, are not under any treaty whatsoever. And of course, next year when the New START treaty expires—I frankly doubt that it will be renewed—then we will no longer have any arms control agreements with Russia.

The other thing I hear often is that our nuclear weapons are on hair-trigger alert. Nothing could be further from the truth. They're not. And that envisions somebody with their finger one inch from a button that'll launch World War III. We're a long way from that. There are a number of measures that have to be taken to get to the point where we'd actually launch a nuclear weapon. The readiness of those weapons are based on the security level that's determined through a number of different categories.

There's no policy of automatic retaliation. That's come up several times—that once we see launches, we would immediately launch. There is a deliberative process that's built into the warnings and indications and communication systems that manage our nuclear deterrent. And there are absolutely no plans for a preemptive use of nuclear weapons. Use of those weapons would be based on a deliberative process, usually in consultation with our allies before such weapons would be used. 

So the aim of our US deterrent policy is to prevent any use of nuclear force. The whole goal of deterrence is to ensure that nuclear weapons are never used in a military way. But as I've often said, we actually use nuclear weapons every single day because they are a political weapon. They are there to ensure that adversaries, when they do their cost-benefit analysis, always come to the conclusion that the costs far outweigh the benefits.

Well, let me stop there. Again, I think we're facing a real challenge to the international rules-based legal order. That goes far beyond a mere land grab by Russia taking territory from Ukraine. It has thrown the gauntlet down, challenging the rules that we've set forth in the UN Charter over territorial integrity and the right to sovereignty. Now we're facing a new era where the great powers would dictate to the small and middle powers what they should and shouldn't do and what kind of territory they're going to have. And we've seen in the past what kind of results would occur. So I can't stress enough, in my view, the importance of standing firm and tall and enforcing the system that we have now in the face of this existential threat. Let me stop there and happy to have any questions.

>> Thank you. Thank you, Guy. That was an excellent, very succinct and cogent summary of many arguments in favor of the nuclear deterrent strategy and policy of the United States. So I thank you for preparing that. I've heard your arguments before, and every time I'm very much persuaded, and then I recall my arguments against you because, as you know, what we talk about—I'm glad you raised the idea of a dialogue. 

In view of that, I invited Robin Collins to ask a question—just a single question, Robin—and then maybe a follow-up. So Robin, go ahead.

>> Thanks very much, Guys. Listening to it, I was taking a million notes. I actually have more than two questions, but let me just—I would like to get a discussion about no first use at some point, but let me go to the key questions I wanted to ask. I think your argument is that nuclear deterrence is safer than no nuclear deterrence. I think that's an underlying argument that you're making. So a key question for me is: in your view, is nuclear deterrence permanent, and therefore what conditions would have to exist for nuclear deterrence to be disposed of?

>> Okay, thank you for that. I don't think nuclear deterrence is permanent. For what I see is going on in the development of technologies, there are things happening that I am very surprised about. Drone warfare that we are seeing going on right now and the technological advances which bring moral and legal challenges. You may know that, for example, there's a movement now to ban robots on the battlefield. There's a conference held every year in Geneva, 30 or 40 nations attend. We are very close to Terminator-type technologies. There was a robotics conference just last month—unbelievable how well-developed these robot systems are. And it raises some very interesting, as I said, moral and legal issues about authorizing robots to engage in combat, and what are the rules regarding that? Whose responsibility is it to ensure that non-combatants are kept as safe as possible in environments like that? Those technologies, especially the precision technologies, have gotten to the point where we see fewer and fewer instances where nuclear weapons would be a method of choice. 

We haven't reached that point where you can say, "Well, we don't need nuclear weapons as the ultimate," because I think there still is a feeling that you can overcome those. The guy that invented—Fritz Haber, I think his name is—he invented gas warfare in World War I, and when asked why he did this, he came up—I think he invented phosgene and a few of the others, mustard gas and sarin—he said, "Well, these weapons are so horrible that once people see them, they won't engage in warfare." Well, he was wrong. They simply—the allied side did develop their own gas warfare and went ahead with it. Fast forward to the use of—

>> I'm sorry. Go ahead.

>> Well, I'm just wondering in terms of technological development, do you think that the United States, China, and Russia will go into space? Trump has been talking about a US space force. I mean, I understand your argument about drones, and now they're developing nets against drones, but don't you think it makes sense to go into space? Wouldn't that be the next frontier?

>> Yes. I mean, of course, they've got the Golden Dome program the United States is developing, which is really kind of an evolution of the "Brilliant Pebbles" initiative that they had with the Strategic Defense Initiative in the Reagan administration. And yeah, I think that's going forward as well. And there are a number of technologies that could be used. Some suspect that the Chinese have already developed satellites that could be flown into other satellites that could create havoc. 

>> Balloons. I mean, the ubiquitous explosion of technologies in different directions that weren't predicted means it's hard to really get your hands around all of this stuff, you know. And I think the consequences of using nuclear weapons—the incidental effects, the collateral damage—it makes people hesitate.

>> Yeah. The nuclear taboo. 

>> Right, and this is the other problem is that, you know, again that Putin has laid the lie to the US or the nuclear weapons states' positive and negative security assurances. We promised that we would never use or threaten to use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear weapons states and gave those assurances, and we'd do it again in 2026 at the next review conference. But nobody is going to believe it because Russia has threatened to use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear weapon states. What's the consequence of that? Which leads to the next question, of course: countries like Turkey, Saudi Arabia, even Germany and Japan have started to have a dialogue—South Korea—about, "Well, we need to have nuclear weapons because those security assurances that were given to us don't mean anything."

>> This is a good segue into the question about no first use. If it's the case that the United States and other nuclear weapons states would never use nuclear weapons against a conventional threat, then they should be able to support together, not unilaterally, a no-first-use policy. But I don't think that's actually the policy. I think the policy is to use the threat of nuclear warfare against a conventional threat as well as against a nuclear threat to deter both. Am I not correct?

>> Yes, I think you are correct because in my job at NATO, it was quite clear. I was there from 2005 to 2011, but I was also in the Defense Department dealing with NATO from 2000 on. When the seven new states joined NATO in 2003, which include the Baltic states, every single one of those countries said that the primary reason they joined is to come under the nuclear umbrella of NATO. And that was incredibly important for them. They are some of the countries that have very forcibly come out against the no-first-use idea because they want that threat to be real and palpable to Russia, primarily, that if they invaded these countries, in order to stop them, the threat or actual use of nuclear weapons would be in play. They believe very strongly that that threat is what keeps the Russians on their side of the border. 

And likewise, I've had several conversations. In fact, last November, I was in Turkey for a conference, gave a speech there, and several people afterwards came up and talked about: "Well, you know, if we can't be under a nuclear umbrella, then we're going to develop our own." In fact, Erdogan has actually said that there's no reason why we shouldn't have nuclear weapons. And that's one of the real challenges: the non-proliferation aspect, the very important part of keeping countries from thinking that their strategic safety and security means they need to acquire that weapon capability as well.

>> Thank you, Guy. I recall when we met back in 2006 and you were, I believe, chairing the Nuclear Planning Group on behalf of the United States, which is the official group that meets every week to talk about nuclear issues. So you were highly experienced back then in 2006 and then went on to be really at the apex of power, just below the Secretary of Defense, but also in charge of not just nuclear modernization but biological and chemical weapons as well. So this has been a very rich discussion. Thank you very much. I want to emphasize to everyone that's listening that Guy also attended the nuclear Non-Proliferation Review Conferences, and I saw him there in 2010 and 2015. So you have made an excellent effort to reach out and to have a dialogue with people who are involved in nuclear arms control and disarmament. So I want to thank you for that contribution. 

>> Well, I was actually at the 1995 extension conference as well. We had a very proactive group that went out and convinced nations that it was in everybody's interest to indefinitely extend the NPT. So over 15 years...

>> Well, I'll stop there. I'll stop recording, if you don't mind. But thank you very much on behalf of everyone, and I really appreciate this. Thank you.
