**Transcript 5A**

Welcome to lesson 5A, uh, 5.1 introduction to the United Nations and Global Governance. So, we've moved from peacekeeping to talking more now about the United Nations and peacekeeping, the UN budget, and we'll also then be moving forward to talk about global governance. So, here's a picture of the United Nations Security Council, which I'll explain in a few minutes what that is. And this is the corridors of the UN. As you can see, pe—there's a—people are not allowed to leave papers like this and information. So that's highly unusual.

I put a picture here of the United Nations. Um, the Secretariat, the Security Council, and the General Assembly are the main parts of the UN in the UN building here. So, I'm not going to explain too much about the function of the Secretariat, but I am going to talk quite a lot about the General Assembly and the Security Council. Here's a picture that I took of the UN Rose Garden on the Hudson River. The—the um—Rose Garden itself is not any longer open to the public, only to registered diplomats with a security card. And because of the lack of land and also, I would say, because of the movement of President Trump to criticize the United Nations—heavily criticize it—that land may someday have to be sold and made into apartments, and maybe the UN will move to Ottawa. We don't know why, because President Trump is very, very critical of the United Nations.

He addressed the—we call them sessions of the United Nations General Assembly. He's addressed it before, as has President Biden and President Obama and um—soon Prime Minister Carney, possibly. Uh, he delivered his remarks on September 23rd, 2025. And that's a picture of him just as he's delivering the remarks. And here he is talking about how the United Nations—he—he essentially blasts it. So, I did put a link in the previous video, but I'm not asking you to go to the White House and watch the entire video. Uh, it's very long and he suggests that the United Nations either ignored or exasperated problems—made them worse around the world—and that he has to—these are being left to him to fix. "What is the purpose of the United Nations?" Trump asked. It is not even coming close to living up to potential. Uh, and in his speech, which was very typical as we've learned about President Trump, he meanders about complaining and also complained that, um, he lost a contract, uh, to, um, renovate the UN headquarters. He claims that he, um, worked to end seven wars. So now he's saying he's ended eight wars, but without any help from the United Nations. So we're not going to watch his speech.

And what I'm going to do instead is welcome you as—as a diplomat, uh, coming into the United Nations. And there's a view of the Hudson River in Manhattan. I'm hoping to do a short supplementary video which introduces you to the–the location of the UN in Manhattan and to the other sites around it with, um, a person who actually knows, uh, New York City extremely well. So, we're going to be doing that next week when I come back from Ottawa.

The UN General Assembly is very evocative. You always know you're there because of the green everywhere, the green carpets. And this is the General Assembly. And this is the front of the UN. I took these pictures of peacekeepers wearing the classic blue beret, or they wear the blue helmet. And you can see the army and the air force, the navy. Uh, here you can see more peacekeepers at the United Nations. And here you can see the UN General Assembly from where the third floor—where, uh, you sit to watch the debate and that's the front where the Secretary General sits and you can see—you can see live—whoever is talking. Who has been the longest-serving Secretary General? U Thant. He served for 10 years. So that's why it's important that we're talking to Peggy Mason, because she served as an ambassador for, uh, many years, not quite 10, but then since then she's been working on the UN. So I really can't get a better expert, uh, than Ambassador Mason.

When I say "get," I mean invite to our class. So she will be referring to the P5, which are five of the countries, uh, that are in the UN Security Council and they have permanent membership in that council, which is a smaller group, and there they are: China, France, the United Kingdom, the United States, and Russia. Where can you find and talk to a P5 diplomat? Perhaps, uh, Ambassador Mason will tell us a little bit about that and also about working with the Canadian delegation which she headed. So we will, I hope, hear about how to find Canadian delegates at the United Nations.

And then also, uh, this is the basement, uh, where they have different conference rooms. I have often held panels and participated in panels in conference rooms C and D in the basement, and that is interesting because they don't have Zoom facilities. They don't have computers. You have to bring your own—actually have to bring your own screens. Only lately did they get a screen. So, it's very primitive, actually. It's like a high school from 60 years ago. You can also see diplomats at the UN cafeteria. Here's the American delegation, uh, talking in the cafeteria. And I'll show you another photo. There they are talking. And—and you could, I suppose, go up to them, but they also for private meetings have their own dining rooms at the UN.

Let me give you some more background about the P5. So the P5, the permanent members, can veto any substantive—of any important matter that is presented to the UN Security Council. We'll talk more about the United Nations being a "talk shop" because many, uh, resolutions that are substantive are—are vetoed by the P5, or one of the members of the P5. Any one of them can veto. In addition to the P5, there are 10 non-permanent members of the UN Security Council that are elected on a two-year, uh, basis for two-year terms, and they're voted on by the UN General Assembly. Canada often tries to become a member of the rotating Security Council. We haven't been successful recently. Whenever we fail, the media call me and ask why. But the real explanation is that the UN General Assembly votes and so there's a lot of lobbying done and so on.

Um, what languages do you need to operate to understand the debate? Well, six. There's six languages, simultaneous translation into six languages at the UN. This is the, uh, kind of silence room, prayer room, uh, where at the UN it's non—non-denominational. It's not Christian or, um, Buddhist. It's, uh, a small room close to a—a very famous stained glass by Chagall.

Okay, where is the center of the UN? The center, the heart of the UN, is as I mentioned this green room, the General Assembly. And that's where all state parties—each country that is recognized is called a state party. And it can send representatives to participate in sessions. So here, this is each—the countries are all in alphabetical order. Uh, and then here, up here on the third floor, is civil society and representatives of NGOs. And then here's journalists and, uh, newspaper, uh, reporters. So they re—vote, and a resolution requires a majority to pass. We'll talk more about that later with a majority and so on.

The United Nations was established in San Francisco in 1945 at the end of World War II, and its headquarters was eventually moved from London, England—not London, Ontario—to New York City. Where is it in New York City? That's—I put a map here. So if you are familiar with New York City, I showed you the Hudson River there. Um, and that's the UN. The Trump Towers tower over Manhattan, uh, very, very much–much bigger than–than the United Nations and quite close by.

Uh, here's a picture of Jim Wurst, who was a very good writer, uh, who worked a lot at the United Nations along with another guy I know, Randy Rydell—people who can write very, very well and get people to agree on resolutions. Put him there because, uh, this was during a debate about, um, the—oh, this is the United Nations and see all the reporters they're waiting for diplomats to come out, but usually diplomats don't speak to reporters. So then because I'm an academic and I don't mind speaking to reporters, you'd be sitting—I'd be like—when there's breaking news, all these reporters ask you for interviews and so on because they're just looking for the story. The diplomats often can't say anything.

Okay. What's the budget affecting the—or the budget is approximately 1.2 billion, which is not a lot of money. Okay. What are the issues affecting the budget? The budget. Um, well, first of all, um, the budget can be—every country has—is an—has an assessment or a debt or a due, and, uh, a lot of countries have unpaid contributions. I didn't invite a financial expert to speak to us about the UN's financial problems, but this—these are very significant. So, I'm putting a bit here more than Peggy Mason will speak about. Uh, some of my students have worked at the UN. And I remember one told me that the UN doesn't have enough money to even run the lights on the weekend, which I found hard to believe, but he was probably true.

Okay, here's some, um, uh, diplomats, uh, at—on—on the third floor. And then this is a negotiating room. Uh, so the UN has the principal organs of the—u—sorry, UN headquarters, and that is as I mentioned the General Assembly, the Security Council. Now, where is the ICJ? Let's say you want to work for the International Court of Justice. That has its seat in The Hague. The UN also has three additional subsidiary regional headquarters: Geneva, Vienna, and Nairobi. So, I imagine that Ambassador Mason was—lived probably in—in Vienna. Uh, and then, um, Tariq Rauf lives in Geneva. So a lot of people find it very expensive in New York City, including all the embassies, and indeed, uh, the United Nations rents its land from the United States. So it's extraterritorial.

Who can vote at the UN today? Can individuals vote? No. Can significant people? Uh, no. There's no parliamentary assembly of people. The only people, or the only ones that can vote, are on be—one vote per a country. And there are some very, very tiny countries that get to vote. Uh, so under Article 19 of the UN Charter, a member state that's in arrears—meaning it has not paid its dues—is supposed to not be able to vote, but that is not imposed. In fact, the United States has not paid its dues in years and years and years, and yet it still gets to vote and exert a veto.

Uh, so I think the best way to learn about the UN is to read this handbook, the GA handbook. It explains all the tiny rules of the UN and all the important ones, and I highly recommend reading it even if you don't intend to work at the UN. For example, let's say the United Nations is undergoing the silence procedure. Well, if you're working at the UN, you don't know what that is unless you read the GA handbook. So the GA handbook explains that that's a phase at the end of the negotiations, and I remember this because the section is sitting there and everyone is either calling their—their capitals or trying to obtain final approval. Remember that the UN is in, um, Eastern Standard Time like us. So many capitals are—are 10 or 15 hours ahead, or it's the weekend. So that can affect the discussions. But anyway, once the draft resolution—I'll teach you what a resolution is in a moment—is declared to be under the silence procedure, then, um, uh, it is automatically approved by the Sec Gen. So there's no voting. There's no, um, voting. I just put my hand up.

Can you vote at the UN today? So here's the journalists waiting for everyone to come out, and then are they voting in favor or not? Imagine the silence procedure like a kind of chat discussion where everyone says, "Okay, here's the draft resolution. Speak now or—or hold your peace," and then everyone goes silent and says nothing—no emojis, nothing. So, everyone collectively kind of silently agrees that the resolution should pass. That's how most of the resolutions are passed now. It's kind of a consensus. So, let's say you're working at the UN and you're looking around. You do not put your hand up and vote against something, you know, if everyone seems cool with it, then well, you know, you—you probably should—should be—should be watching what's happening and—and—and listening to your capital. So, the silence procedure is basically diplomacy's answer to "if nobody says anything, we're all good, right?"

Okay. I'm still on the topic of who can vote. Well, this little tiny little, uh—
