**Transcript 5B**

5B on the United Nations: a primer. So, we're learning about the United Nations more, especially about peacekeeping. What is the Preamble of the UN Charter that was written in 1945? Well, it states its founding intention is to "save succeeding Generations from the scourge of War." This means to save future generations from the horror of warfare. It's not there because of Western desires to, let's say, ensure lower tariffs or liberty or democracy; it's there to prevent conflict and to promote lasting peace.

Why do I say that? Because exact wording counts, and if you listen carefully to Ambassador Mason and Professor Dorn, you'll hear them weigh their words very carefully. They're always making sure that what they write and what they say—very, very careful people. Similarly to these Canadians pictured here who are employed to try to interpret what the UN is saying, uh, and they have a newsletter called "Reaching Critical Will." Very—a lot of, uh, diplomats pay more attention to them; it's easier. Ray Acheson—she's actually from Huron College. She learned to write at Huron—congratulations.

Okay, moving on, talking about the blue helmets of the peacekeepers, the white tanks, and the current UN Ambassador Bob Rae, uh, who was an NDPer but is now the, uh—appointed by the Liberal government to be the ambassador. You can see him there, and there's another picture of him in front of the UN flag. So the UN flag is blue, and the main conflict provisions are in chapters 6 and 7 of the UN Charter.

Let's talk about Chapter VI, which encourages member states to resolve their disputes by different methods, and these might be negotiations, mediation; they might be arbitration. Think of these as different ways to resolve conflict, and they have their "other peaceful means." So these are approaches that are valid, and they are representative of peaceful dispute resolution, not threats and war.

Chapter VII of the UN Charter is—is—is key to the UN's collective security function. The UN is a collective security organization; it's not a collective defense organization. So under Chapter VII of the Charter, the UN Security Council can call on member states to implement measures that do not involve the use of force, such as a ceasefire. Um, measures often take the form of sanctions, and Adrien Blanchard will talk to us about these sanctions against Russia and many other countries that he's involved in imposing. Uh, that's another guest speaker that we have that I'm excited about coming to talk about embargoes, restrictions on financial interactions, and restriction on access to overseas assets, which has been done.

Okay, Article 4 can be invoked—this is the article of the UN Charter that permits the Security Council to actually authorize the use of force, including armed peacekeepers, if non-military measures prove inadequate. How can those actions take place? By air, sea, or land, such as demonstrations, blockades, and other operations that are carried out by UN member states to maintain or restore international peace and security—peace and security.

What does "invoked" mean? Uh, invoked means to cite or appeal to something as an authority. So I put a picture here of Antonio Guterres, the current Sec Gen, and here he is invoking. Uh, so they're considered to—to—to be trying to—they're an authority and they're trying to make an argument. Here are some diplomats arguing about the wording for invoking. They're arguing—I—that's what it is at the UN. You can see them with these pieces of paper arguing; it's quite cool.

Here's UN Secretary General Antonio Guterres. He invoked, uh, Article 99, which has hardly ever been invoked before. Um, indeed, according to the UN spokesperson, it has not been used for decades. Guterres reiterated his appeal for a humanitarian, uh, ceasefire in the Gaza Strip under Article 99 of the UN Charter, uh, in order—and this was urgent because the—he argued the civilian population must be spared from greater harm. Well, that ceasefire never came into place.

The Department of Peacekeeping Operations could have been invoked and brought into the Gaza Strip, or it could, uh, be invoked in, uh, any kind of conflict—Nepal. Uh, we'll talk more about the different UN peacekeeping operations currently, but DPKO is where Ambassador Peggy Mason has worked for many years. She's very, very familiar with it and, uh, she's going to talk to us about different peacekeeping operations. Right now, there's 11 of them led by DPKO—they always say DPKO—and this is notable given that peacekeeping was never actually explicitly mentioned in the UN Charter. Yet it's the cornerstone; it's extremely important to the UN's efforts to maintain international peace and security.

This is a very useful site: "United Nations Peacekeeping.org: What is Peacekeeping?" for learning about UN peacekeeping, and it changes very frequently. For example, last year's course notes say that there were—are, uh, 12 peacekeeping operations; now there's 11. And if you select 12 on the quiz, well then it's wrong, and so it's very important to listen to the lectures and update your notes. Don't rely on notes from previous years.

I have talked for years about UNEF I, and that's because, uh, it's a very famous crisis, uh, involving the Hungarian crisis and the Suez crisis, and Dr., uh, Dorn will explain it in a bit more detail, I'm hoping. But that was the first United Nations Emergency Force, called UNEF I, and that was the first time that peacekeeping forces were used. Canada actually, uh, contributed forces to UNEF I. Canada contributed forces because of—uh, he wasn't Prime Minister yet, but, uh—Lester B. Pearson was a diplomat who provided a draft resolution and presented it to the General Assembly for approval. And that was—he wrote it, and that move was pivotal in the development of modern peacekeeping efforts. Canada eventually got, actually, the Nobel Peace Prize in 1958 for proposing a UN peacekeeping force. So there's, uh—uh—Pearson with the Nobel Peace Prize back in 1958, well before he became Prime Minister.

What about traditional first-generation peacekeeping? We—we don't use this nomenclature so much anymore, but, uh, perhaps, uh, Peggy will say first, second, third, fourth generation peacekeeping. Uh, let's talk about what that is. Traditional peacekeeping. Traditional, uh, first-generation peacekeeping was, uh, impartial, so both sides were supposed to be, uh, neutral, or all sides were supposed to remain neutral. Um, now peacekeepers can be fighting for the state or against rebels; they may not be neutral. But then, back then, they were supposed to be neutral. Back then, they were supposed to be lightly armed. That meant that they were not armed with, uh, guns or tanks; they were supposed to be actually minimal. Um, and in the end, some peacekeepers got hacked to death along the North Korean demilitarized zone—I saw that area myself, um, because they were not able to defend themselves. It also used to require all parties' approval; for example, in Cyprus, all the parties, Turkey and Greece, were supposed to be in agreement for the peacekeeping force. And it's supposed to be non-territorial in that it's supposed to avoid seizing territory, but now it can. So peacekeeping has definitely evolved from the 1940s and 50s, 60s.

And what is the second generation? The second generation, beginning in the 1990s. This is kind of the height of peacekeeping in the world, 1990 to 95. Third generation here. Um, basically they expanded it to include enforcement, which some people will say is robust peacekeeping, and some people will call modern peacekeeping where it's much more, uh, robust, much more, um, violent. And then third generation is more complex and focuses on peacebuilding. A lot of people don't use "third generation" very properly. And then fourth generation is when you're trying to build a state, you're trying—like Afghanistan—and you're trying to build in all sorts of electoral activities and voting. Uh, you're having regional organizations involved and so on. So most peacekeeping now is fourth generation.

But let's go back to second generation. So, second-generation modern peacekeeping—here you can see that they are armed, they may not be neutral, they are deployed between states or within states, uh, they can operate without consent if no central government agrees to it—like in Afghanistan, there was no central government for a while. They can use force, and then they can be deployed doing electoral monitoring or humanitarian relief. Dr. Dorn has a great deal of experience, uh, on electoral support, humanitarian operations in, um—uh—I can't quite remember if it was Nepal, I can't point remember where—oh, East Timor. He was involved in the election in—in East Timor. He might tell you about that because it was extremely disturbing. Uh, he was on CBC Radio when he was in East Timor and watched people being burned alive in a church. I'm not sure that we'll talk about that.

But let's talk about UNAMIR, UNAMIR, UNAMIR, which some people say was a total failure, uh, because it failed to prevent the genocide in Rwanda. So was it a failure? The genocide in—in Rwanda. Um, okay, so following the creation of a—here's Romeo Dallaire, who was the general in charge of the peacekeeping operation, who happened to be a Canadian General, Romeo Dallaire. And he appealed to the UN for peacekeeping troops, for—for anything, for any kind of help, um, in the operation. And so how many did he get? If this was a multiple-choice question: zero. He got absolutely zero. No countries committed to try to prevent the genocide in Rwanda. Zero. No countries. I say that with great emphasis because at that time it was just a terrible, terrible situation. Terrible. In October 1993, six months after, he's still calling for troops. UNAMIR deployed 550 troops. So how many troops did the UN deploy in Rwanda in the end? 550 people. That's it. You think that there would have—the world would have come to their aid and had—would have deployed as many as in Afghanistan, tens of thousands; but no, only 550 people.

Now, Romeo Dallaire says that he could have prevented Rwanda's genocide with just 5,000 troops if—if the United Nations had said that. And he was quite traumatized by that. Uh, he has what's called Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder, PTSD, and this is a mental health disorder due to having, uh, witnessed the genocide and—and literally thousands of people being killed, driving through, uh, streets of—of tortured and killed people. Um, I put a picture here of Thinkers' Lodge, which is in Nova Scotia, which is run by the International Pugwash Movement and the Canadian government. And I was at a conference with Romeo Dallaire seated right there, and I'm an early riser; I was up at about 5:00 in the morning and he came out and was talking to me right there and he said he couldn't sleep—he often—that just the images of all the, uh, slaughtered people, uh, kept him awake.

Okay, so Canada, uh, decided, uh, to put together a proposal for a rapid reaction capability for the UN, and this was a proposal that was presented by the government of Canada to the United Nations. But the United States opposed it and—and behind the scenes, um, pushed countries to vote against it. I was very intimately involved in—in the writing of this in Montebello, and that was due to my work on the peacekeeping training center. But, um, also the report is still, I think, interesting, but you don't have to look at it.

I've worked on a whole bunch of different proposals to do with peacekeeping, and I—I was making a list here, um, since 1991. And even a few weeks ago, I wrote an article for the Globe and Mail on, um—2024, "A peacekeeping force could be the innovation the Canada-US border needs," which the Globe and Mail published. Uh, so I've worked on a UN emergency force, the responsibility—R2P—and so on. So when I talked to Peggy, um, we do tend to use the language of peacekeeping a bit, and this primer gives you some of those words ahead of time. I'm not expecting you to be an expert on peacekeeping, but I want you to—to be enthusiastic about something like that.

Okay, what would you contribute? Let's say you were a country or you're acting on behalf of a delegation. Um, you can look at the CIA World Factbook and it will give you the, uh, numbers of military personnel and the kind of equipment that your country has. Let's say you're representing Chad or—or something like that. Um, so let's say if your—pretend you're a country. I don't know what country you want to be: India, Jamaica, Trinidad—
