# Transcript 5C

Welcome everyone to uh 5C or 5.3 where we are preparing you to represent Canada or another country and how to write resolutions. So this is the back of the UN where only diplomats are allowed to go. There's a lot of sculptures and there's the Noah's Ark. Uh you can see that we've done a bit of preliminary work on 5A and 5B. And now I want to just do a little bit more in-depth work before our guest speaker Leah Holla talks to us.

When she's talking to us, I show this slide so you can see it now and study it. When she's talking to us, I show this slide which is her background and also it has the contact address for the United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs. And I show this uh as a picture because it's very important. Very seldom do you see students knowing a UN resolution, profiting from the UN resolution, turning that into South Korea—the Republic of Korea—giving $10 million for uh education and then she is with other distinguished speakers as you can see at the UN launching this. So, I wanted to ask her to come and I was really pleased that she agreed to speak to our class here in uh London, Ontario.

Let me mention I showed her this and she'll talk a little bit about that. And I showed her this and I showed her that as a final slide and then we got to business talking about last week's consultations. And we also talked a little bit about the numbers of youth that are working at the UN and that thus the dress code becoming more informal, people using their telephones everywhere now and fewer restrictions.

That leads me to talk about UN procedures for simulations, not just for the United Nations, but if you ever get the opportunity to participate in a UN sim—uh a model UN—that is great. It doesn't have to be at the UN, it could be uh in a classroom. So for years I ran a UN assembly with 140 students that I taught and I'm very sad that I can't do that anymore because of the numbers that we have here online, but English. Okay, so there's six languages at the UN and obviously at the UN simulation you tend to use English. Should you stand up and speak in French or Spanish? Of course you could do so.

Uh what about credentials? Um, so most people who speak at the UN here in the UN General Assembly are representing their country. They have to be very careful what they say in this room and they have to stick to the script. They cannot go off in a direction that they want to go off in and they have to call their country all the time even though there's a different time zone and just check that they can vote and so on. For example, Egypt has to always check even if it's a different time zone, but they're very very good. Uh the Egyptians have an excellent foreign service and their officers are amazing and their ambassadors are amazing in terms of speaking in English.

What about participating? A non-member state would be a country—would be Palestine. And Palestine officially at the United Nations does not yet have the same rights as those of full members like the 193 state parties. So those countries can attend but they cannot vote on substantive issues. They can vote on procedural issues. A quorum is a simple majority of the members that are there. So in the case of the UN General Assembly, um if there's 31 people there then the quorum is half of 31—15.5—so 16 people plus one. A quorum will be assumed to be present. Okay, so you know later you'll learn about quorums but uh you know people always say, "Oh, is there enough people here? Do we have a quorum?" Um what that means is, are there enough people according to the constitution?

Obviously delegates will show up and in the UN model UN tend to—they were very disrespectful often. Um you are now allowed to use telephones. We used to say no and you should obviously turn off your cell phone. The first order of business is the agenda. So what's going to be on the agenda first? It's—you think of it like Robert's Rules of Order. We have to agree on the agenda. The United Nations Conference on Disarmament has not agreed on an agenda in over two decades. They can't even agree what they're going to talk about. So they don't even talk about what they're going to talk about because they can't agree on the agenda. All those diplomats in Geneva living the high life.

Okay. Then the resolution that's first on the agenda, that's what we're going to be talking about today is the agenda. So, a motion to discuss the resolution on the agenda is put on the table. There's the—well, here the dais is the speaker. Um and it's usually the Secretary-General, but because the Secretary-General can't always be there, they rotate in. The House of Commons does the same. They rotate in the Speaker of the House, often sitting there falling asleep, a different person listening to everything. So they have to be there present. Um in simulations usually the motions that have the most number of signatories will be debated first. But this is not true at the UN. There they have a definite agenda and there's different motions that are to be debated. In a simulation they will have a for and against speakers list to debate each motion. But at the UN there is a speakers list for and against. Um but it's governed slightly differently in that you typically when you speak for a resolution you're in favor of it. You're not against it.

Okay. Then there's always this thing about closing the debate. It's the Secretary-General who feels the room—the consensus in the room—or that the motion is ready for a vote. So they're responsible for doing that. You can't just put up your hand and say, "I move that we close the debate." You can do that in regular meetings and that's a strategy and people will all go, "No no no, you can't do that," or they'll vote on it. Once the agenda has been determined there's an open speakers list and closure of debate. Um I put my face here on purpose. You don't really need to know the closure of debate rules governing debate suspension. There's a lot here on suspension because in the old model UNs you used that a lot. But in the UN General Assembly today, pictured here—there's the UN with all the flags and here's the UN Security Council, not the UN General Assembly debating. Um, so postponement—two-thirds of a vote to pass.

So here's some more rules. And I don't want you to memorize these rules. I'm not going to ask you questions about right of reply, but speeches must be made in the third person. For example, "Afghanistan argues that the United States should not withdraw," "The United States states," not "I" or "we." Um, if you're not there, then you forfeit your time, which means you need—the Speaker of the House in Canada has a whip, a person who whips everyone to get in on the right time. But here, the UN does not have that. They call you and they have speakers and intercoms.

Privilege. You can rise on a point of personal privilege where you interrupt because something like the building—there's a smoke alarm going on or the speaker is inaudible somehow. They have speakers and they have simultaneous translation and everybody here has a speaker in their ear, a microphone in their ear. A point of order where you indicate improper parliamentary procedure—believe me, that doesn't happen at the UN. Um points of parliamentary inquiry to ask a question regarding the rules of procedure—that's a stalling tactic and they won't allow you to do that at the UN, but that's a popular thing to do at simulations.

Signatories. Um okay. So when they start to vote, usually there's a draft, there's a roll call, and they publicize how many signatories they need to pass something. In a UN simulation, you can sign a draft resolution, but it's when you finally sign that it really counts. Let us learn to write a UN resolution. So, we're going to kind of talk about how to do so using uh my latest proposal published in the Globe and Mail on a made-in-Canada peacekeeping force in Canada. Uh so, it's a useful skill. Um it would be along the 49th parallel. Anyway, to do this as a writer, you must understand the content. So, you cannot just put the information from a PowerPoint into chat and say, "Write a UN resolution." You need to understand the content. And I really want to emphasize with you that many of you are using AI to write letters and to write resolutions and to write all sorts of things. But you still need to understand the content so that you can engage with other delegations and change the wording. Every nuance is important. Every word, every sentence—you wouldn't believe how important that is.

Uh so here's my latest proposal, a bold proposal that—well actually I think the Globe and Mail said an innovative proposal—but they published it and I'm getting a lot of calls. "How can Canada defend itself?" Toronto Star today and last week on and on, they're very concerned about defending ourselves and Belgium and different places. Anyway, so it's the longest undefended world boundary. Uh and then we have an economic statement where we need to figure out how to distribute um these sorts of things. Um okay.

Um okay. So here I'm calling for the establishment of a made-in-Canada peacekeeping force. You can immediately see the problems with all that. You've taken some peacekeeping with me already. But I'm saying it would be neutral. Would it be passed at the UN? Readers don't even think about that. They're just thinking that I've lost my mind. But I'm saying here that it would foster global cooperation and innovation and it would draw inspiration. So here what I'm saying is we would actually draw from Canadians. Uh we wouldn't draw from the global south. Most UN peacekeeping operations are cheaper because those combat-capable soldiers are trained and they are paid very little by their host countries. So let's say these people are from Bangladesh. Bangladesh has very cheap peacekeepers. But I'm saying Canada would do so using people from local communities. So immediately a red flag because you know that's not going to pass at the UN.

Okay. So then I go on—the soldiers trained in—trained somehow—peacekeeping training, international stewardship. Of course they would not don the UN's blue helmets—iconic blue helmets—because there would be a Security Council veto. So we know that such an initiative would be vetoed by the United States and probably Russia and China because it would have implications for their own territorial conquests. It would be vetoed by China because of China's interests with Taiwan and so they don't want a peacekeeping force in Taiwan. Similarly, the US would veto it.

So, keeping that in mind, I veer off into how this could engage young people and perhaps even the United States. People from the United States might come over and be interested in universal healthcare, progressive values. There I go on and on. And this is the kicker because, of course, many people would love to have a one-year visa program. And if that would be a way to draw them in from Ivy League schools or from countries that have lots of money, that would foster cultural exchange and mutual learning. You're already guessing that I'm advocating for this based on a Katimavik program that was very successful way back then where we trained youth to travel across Canada and serve as peacekeepers, border guards, interpreters, and they even um cleared trails in national parks.

So here I'm getting more, you know, enthusiastic about where this force would be, which would be obviously along the 49th parallel. Uh, and also would it be in Alberta? I write here—I skipped Alberta because I wasn't sure Alberta would agree and went straight to British Columbia's old growth forests here and argued that they would be in the prairies. So see how you can kind of get away with that. And they might study languages such as Spanish, promoting cross-cultural understanding and enhancing North America's ability. So it's still not going to pass at the UN, everyone. It has no hope of passing at the UN.

A lot of people are used to talking about AI now, just trying to get everything through with AI and talking about drones and so on. So I put that in about drones. We are spending money on drones and drones are very much talked about. Last week at Global Affairs Canada we spent a considerable amount of time talking about drones and obviously we would have RCMP and defense personnel. They would be helping the peacekeepers. They would all be trained in de-escalation diplomacy and so on. So you can see this is not going to pass. It's not going to pass in the House of Parliament either. It would be opposed by the Conservatives. I think the Liberals might pass it um eventually and the Greens and the NDP, but I was at the House of Parliament last week and visited it on Monday and they couldn't even agree on the criminal—there's a criminal legislation that was going through this. I watched it for a while for about an hour and a half. Uh, so they couldn't agree on criminal prosecutions. So here I'm writing about fentanyl. So basically you're getting the impression that this is not going to happen.

Um, what am I saying here? Oh, our shared commitment. This is just rhetoric by me. And then I'm just talking about this. So this is the world's longest uh symbol of peacekeeping coexistence because we have this border. So don't ever forget students that this is the border. The United States owns this territory, Alaska, and this territory. Don't forget that. And that's what makes this the longest border stretching over here. Maintaining the status quo is no longer sufficient and people are worried. But I'm being polite. A Team Canada initiative supported by cutting-edge technology would serve as a powerful symbol. So, could we get that passed at the UN with a "made in Canada" label? No. You could write the best resolution in the world and it's not going to get passed.

Guarding a legacy of peace. Um well, yes. So, we do need to reinforce our reputation as a peacekeeping leader. We're not demonstrating leadership at the UN anymore on that. As the world faces an increasingly uncertain future... Do you like my pictures here? Uh, with millions of people dying—so I didn't put any people dying in Gaza. I can't upset you. I would have to put a disclaimer on here. I didn't put any people dying in Chechnya, uh, in Israel, in Ukraine, possibly Taiwan. Look at these benign shots. But there we are, leading by example. And then I of course resort to the past, which I did today for the Toronto Star. I started talking about the history of Pearsonian internationalism and peacekeeping training centers and how we need to move forward into a world of middle powers cooperating in the wake of Davos toward more and more cooperation and middle powermanship—leading by example rather than pouring billions—and literally they're talking about the US budget—is now nearly $1 trillion every year. And the world spends—I think it's—I'll have to look that up so I don't say it right now but essentially right now—I'll talk about it in a few weeks—we—this would be something that we could invest in instead of, let's say, space defense.

We talked a lot last week about the "golden dome" and that concept—I was quite surprised how much we talked about it. This was the consultation with Global Affairs Canada. Most importantly it would reaffirm the shared values of peace and cooperation that have long defined the Canada-US defense relationship. Leading by example. So now is the time to act. Okay. In—here we are. Um this is changing even today. A reporter called me today—or no, a television station—and they wanted to talk about um new attacks here on Zaporizhzhia by Russia despite the ceasefire and so on. And then I write here, "instead of waiting for hypothetical situations such as an attempt by President Trump to seize Canada or to annex the country, we must take proactive steps, leading by example."

Um, yeah. So, here I'm using the word Great Powers—published in the Globe and Mail—and they kept the "G" and the "P," which is a new world that we've entered. Okay. So, how to write a resolution at the UN? I showed you the pictures here at the front of the UN and the UN assembly. And when the UN was created, remember in 1945, there were only 51 member states—that didn't include the whole world. Now, it does. And so there are 193 right now. Roughly 80% of the General Assembly resolutions are adopted by consensus. That is without taking a vote. They don't put their hands up. They just agree.

Let me talk about that. So this whole old way of having a majority 50% plus one—that was very popular in UN simulations because you could win or lose simply by one vote after a majority. And people didn't care about or try to understand what Mexico thought; people didn't think about uh what Syria thought and so on. But now the UN runs by consensus more and delegates are much more concerned about the viewpoints of others and they want compromise. They take—they try—because you have to have a consensus in order to implement this. So you might as well try and get it at the UN. Given the dramatic increase in member states over time, reaching consensus is vital. These are some um behind-the-scenes photos where the diplomats work. These are the committees and so on. First Committee and so on. They meet in these kind of smaller rooms. Because the General Assembly's resolutions are recommendations and not legally binding on member states, reaching consensus has evolved as a way to ensure the widest possible implementation of General Assembly decisions.

In model UN simulations they do not consider implementation and so they tend to argue and be opposed. Most resolutions at model UN conferences are adopted by a vote. But if we are now trying to teach consensus—and you cannot truly understand the UN as an institution without understanding that it has evolved toward trying to reach consensus just as NATO tries to reach consensus.

How do you format your resolution? Uh AI will do this for you now. You can put it in and just test it and you'll see that it will write anything that you write as a resolution, marginalizing it and doing the wording. So practice with AI and do some draft resolutions. Format your resolution so that uh a resolution begins with the General Assembly and then there are what are called preambular phrases that describe the problem being addressed and explain it. So it recalls, it explains the purpose of the resolution, and that all offers support for the operative—what is the UN going to do? So the operative clauses that follow—each clause in the preamble begins with an underlined word and ends with a comma—and Chat will do that all for you. Now operative clauses are numbered and state the action to be taken by the body. These clauses all begin with strong words, strong present tense words. Uh so those are followed by a semicolon except for the last, which ends with a period. There should be no periods in the body of the resolution. Well, put your resolution into AI and make sure that it does it properly.

Here are some delegates about to—I was actually here so I took the photo. You can see the countries are all lined up there alphabetically. There's China and they're about to receive the draft document in 2010. Um, so you'll hear the guest speaker refer to another Security Council resolution 2150. And that's how they run off your lips—you just know all the numbers. It's crazy. Uh so this is some sample resolutions here um that I want to show you. So there you see the title of the resolution and don't copy your resolutions from previous resolutions and then hand them in as if they're new. Don't do that, but learn from them. So there's the preambular phrases: recalling and concern. So there's nothing operative there. Noting... recognizing... So this resolution goes on for pages—two more pages—and then it concludes with its operative clauses. So what are they? António Guterres is looking straight for those operative clauses. So here you can see everyone's flipping to the end and the tension is high because they're looking and they're suddenly discovering that there's 64 operative clauses, which is unprecedented in 2010. It's unbelievable really that they'd agreed on 64 operative clauses.

So anyway, here it is. This is another sample resolution. And here these were written by my students and they only had five sponsors. So in my UN simulation, it would not be—we would not discuss it. You have to have consensus and this is not enough consensus uh to get this at that time. Now of course there's 99 countries that have signed the TPNW and they've actually agreed to a new treaty that's very similar to this. So that's interesting. In 99 countries, the TPNW. So, this is back in 2010. They're phoning back to their capitals right there and they're getting information about what they should do and if they should proceed.

Here's some resolutions from previous years in my classroom uh where they couldn't even get, you know, "Be it resolved that the UN declare war on Iran." Uh that was in the past and now of course the United States government and Israel are considering bombing Iran for regime change and that's a big threat. So here's that resolution, but it didn't get anywhere. Sample resolutions from my model UNs. This one was interesting because the student that sponsored it was able to obtain seven sponsors and then it just gradually rose in our discussion and they finally passed it. This is before—so the two co-signatories Kazakhstan and Kenya must agree with the resolution at the beginning. This is in a UN simulation typically.

Here you can see people phoning. Very exciting. And a resolution from Canada on peacekeeping. What might they think? Basically it would never even get into this room. It will never get to the United Nations. I brought it up to show you that some ideas are domestic proposals and ideas meant to ferment debate and discussion uh in the wake of threats to annex Canada and that Canada would become a 51st state. Can you use these preambular phrases? So these are some sample ones. There's many. I just let you—you don't have to memorize those. Please don't memorize them. Welcoming, taking into account, keeping in mind.

And here are the operative clauses. Call upon, designate, express, express hope, further, invite. See how general they are and how gentle they are. It's not "demand." UN General Assembly sample resolutions from my classroom here. Uh we're sitting at the UN on the third floor here. Um, consensus important. So, I mentioned this that all member states could agree to a resolution without taking a vote. If they agree on the text, but there's just one member state—Iran or Israel or—but not Palestine because it can't vote—that requests a vote, then consensus is not reached. Um, and I've seen that actually at the UN with Palestine standing outside on the newsroom arguing against a resolution.

Here are the happy writers, particularly Randy Rydell, uh, who managed to reach a consensus among 193 countries on the 2010 resolution and that was passed with the 64 planks—the 64 operative clauses. So, he's looking very happy. And I took this picture of him because he should be happy. And here's some more happy people back in 2010. And there's Jim Wurst who also wrote many reports that fed into that.

And then finally, uh, Jonathan Granoff, who you heard from in my other class uh speaking—the President of the Global Security Institute—and Alice Slater, who is a New York City um civil society representative, smiling because it was adopted by consensus. You would not get consensus on my resolution for a made-in-Canada peacekeeping force, but it's worth me introducing it to you as a way to teach you about consensus. Thank you for listening today.