# Transcript 5D

...or to the cloud. Hi everyone. I'm really happy to introduce you to Leah Holla who is uh a student and also at McGill University studying physics—has already studied physics. You know what? I've got to stop it because this woman, the crazy janitor, has come again.

Just going to record the janitor going by. I think it's kind of amusing. We're—we're trying to talk. Um and she's just going to take a little tour and—and go away. Uh hopefully I'll just uh close the door. Sorry about this, Leah. I really... Okay, sorry about that students. Uh the janitor often works late in the evening, but I—I never know when that's going to happen. Um so Leah's here. Thank you very much. Leah's extraordinarily busy today, and we'll talk about that—why. So I was really pleased to book this—this appointment. Um, and this week we're talking about the United Nations. So, I'm going to introduce uh Leah by sharing a—a picture, if you don't mind, of um the United Nations. And here we are. Um, shouldn't have done that before. Leah, here we are. Our guest speaker, UN—former UN youth intern, Leah Holla.

Uh so Leah uh was part of a UN initiative called "Leaders for Tomorrow" and she's going to talk a little bit about that with us and then she became the Executive Director of the International Physicians for the Prevention of Nuclear War, which is a huge organization around the world, and she was Executive Director of the Canadian branch, which is also very large. Leah previously worked in um various programs and so on from the medical perspective and the neurology perspective but now is focused on physics. And then let me go to the next slide. Uh on campus she works with—well she did work when—with Students for Peace and Disarmament, a group that she co-founded in first year and that is trying to still cut ties with the military-industrial complex by divesting and ceasing research for harmful weapons manufacturers, creating a community for peace activism. Uh she also worked on different programs; for example, I underlined this one at Yale University but also a youth-run social justice overnight camp in BC on Gabriola and worked as a political campaigns coordinator with her student union and grew up surrounded by nature. You're a BC-er from Vancouver Island. We'll talk a little bit about feminism, I hope. And I just want to mention this "Leaders for Tomorrow" program. Leah, is this program still in existence? I—I see here there's a contact with the United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs. Can you tell the students a little bit about that?

Happily and thank you so much for having me on, Dr. Simpson. Um the United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs has a "Youth for Disarmament" branch of which the website is right here and they have various annual programs that they run. They come out of the United Nations Security Council Resolution, I believe 2250, on Youth, Peace and Security. Um so really fortunately at the highest level of governance it's been affirmed that youth and students have a role to play in protecting peace and security and engaging on nuclear disarmament. Um, so out of that resolution came an opportunity for states to give funding. And you'll see on the bottom left, uh, it says that this program was funded by the Republic of Korea, which generously gave $10 million to, um, give opportunities to 25 folks selected from around the world. And I was very um, I felt very fortunate to be selected as one of them for them.

That's South Korea. That's excellent. And they gave how much money? They gave 10 million which was put into a couple different programs, one of which was this program. Um so that funded various educational um initiatives online for us followed by uh over two years followed by um two trips to the United Nations during First Committee week. So during the disarmament— First Committee. Okay. Let's go to the next slide because I just want to mention that your career was launched and here we see on Instagram still there uh you are part of distinguished speakers marking the global launch of UNODA's new disarmament education strategy. So tell us a little bit about this—this huge initiative—well funded. I've circled you in green there.

I was grateful, very grateful for—for that opportunity and and for the ODA staff for setting it up and—and ensuring youth representation on the panel. Um the disarmament education strategy was really a full-circle moment for me because um I got involved in disarmament when I was in high school. Uh a teacher had a guest on—um had a guest come in, Tamara Lorincz, who who spoke on military spending and disarmament and I got to reading um and if it hadn't been for that teacher I wouldn't have—uh or the guest speaker or later mentors who I met—um I wouldn't have become involved in disarmament. So uh in my work later I started to work with—with teachers and teachers' unions giving workshops on how to teach on disarmament education. So uh as a member of the cohort they invited me to help launch—uh to—to give consultation and—and speak at the launch of the United Nations disarmament education strategy. So this was the—the first of its kind, the first edition in 2022. Um and I highly recommend reading it if you're interested in the arena of disarmament education. It's really, really full of—of advice.

Well, there's many, many interns at the UN that are very fortunate and that they get to work in New York City. I—I wanted to show the students this picture of the Hudson River and the back of the UN where um people who are visiting never see—uh but this is for diplomats and I was wondering if you ever got a chance to—to tour this area at the back of the UN.

Gratefully I did. Yeah. The—the United Nations staff running the program took us all for a tour uh including some of the more off-limit areas such as the rose garden and, you know, the—the UN is a very—can be a tense environment so I think a lot of the most wonderful conversations and connections can happen in infrastructure like this outside by the roses but I felt very— And that's where they smoke as well so you don't have to smoke to go out there to talk to them; you can just be out there and talk to, you know, where the smokers... This is uh one of the UN cafeterias. Uh and I was wondering if you ever had a chance to go here and what kind of place that this is.

I yeah was grateful to have the—the opportunity to go to the—the cafeterias as well. I think similar to the rose garden, a lot of the most uh important, meaningful conversations happen over food or outdoors, kind of outside of the arena of the General Assembly where people are—are reading pre-written texts or responding to each other in a more um diplomatic way, less—less free-flowing. So, uh, yeah, the UN cafeteria and general spaces around the UN are more open for—for free-flowing conversation and people just approaching each other. Often if you see someone you want to talk to in the General Assembly, you'll approach them after at the UN cafeteria or kind of follow them out into the hallway area after.

I noticed uh on last week in Ottawa that you were very comfortable with all the diplomats and people from Foreign Affairs coming up and speaking to you and you—I—I was watching you and you're just completely comfortable with having those sorts of conversations and engaging. So that's—that's—this was a—a good training ground for—for what we're going to talk about in a few minutes. Uh my last slide here is the cafeteria um from a different perspective and where important information—but not secret information—is exchanged. It's information that diplomats want to kind of release so that the uh civil society knows the direction that they're going. So I put a picture here of the couches, very old, from the 1960s, and that's what the United Nations looks like. Did you want to comment?

Yeah, I—this is I—I think you—you described it really accurately. There's also another cafeteria which is diplomats only. So no civil society, no lobbyist, nobody who's not a diplomat is—is allowed. So if—um if they want to have a more p—private conversation, they'll go there. But this is—this is where normally we approach them as—as civil society.

That's great. Um so now I wanted to talk with you, Leah, about the activities that you're doing now because you're very, very effective. You've just pulled together, I think, more than 20, 25—I don't know, I'll know in a few minutes—organizations writing a letter. So you drafted the letter and then of course you used Chat or AI through McGill to just smooth out the letter a little to make it more um shorter and then uh you took the letter and suddenly you contacted all 25 organizations and asked each of us—I—was representing the Canadian Peace Research Association as the president—to sign the letter. And this letter—do you want to tell the students about what motivated you to write the letter and why we're all signing it in a hurry today?

Yeah. Well, I—it's a collective effort and I'm really grateful that—that folks are willing to—to come together. Um, so we're just coming out of the government consultations in Ottawa and it feels like a really crucial moment and crucial week to be paying attention to the choices of world leaders and—and holding them accountable for—for the security not only nationally but also internationally. As um your students know, uh the New START treaty expires tomorrow, February—or February 4th, I believe. Um and uh there's going to be no arms control on the two largest nuclear arsenals of which Canada is sandwiched. It lies right—right in the middle. Um Canada has—has a really important role not only geographically but also as a middle power. Um, and we live in a democracy where we're—we have structures to hold our leaders accountable. Um, but one really unfortunate thing we're—we're seeing is a lot of the government decisions being um made don't completely match with the rhetoric that we have been—have been saying about our role as a middle power. Um, historically, Canada has played a role in uh, facilitating and encouraging arms control conversations through mediating diplomacy. However, right now we're seeing a drastic cut to all diplomatic endeavors, including Global Affairs Canada. Um, and it's not finalized yet, but that risks—are—the arms control unit and the disarmament unit. We only have a very small team of people who work full-time on disarmament and nuclear disarmament specifically. Um, and despite uh no arms control and—and major global regression and—and the clock being set 85 seconds to midnight, um we're seeing that it's being considered that uh they cut the—the very little resources that are—that are being put towards our diplomatic efforts. So um now feels like a really important moment to be defending the existing institutions uh including diplomacy and diplomatic institutions that we have here in Canada as well as internationally—the United Nations, you know—but for—for this very moment I think um it's important uh...

Yeah, and your letter definitely underlined that in one page essentially that we do need to uh prioritize Global Affairs Canada and the amount—amount of money that they spend on international fora like the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty Review Conference that's coming up this spring in April-June and also for possibly in the future that Canada might attend like the TPNW Review Conference in November. And then also you mentioned to disarmament education which is an international priority. Yeah, they were—we're not—I—I need to mention to the students that the consultations that Leah and I were attending were um with the government and there was 20 people there from civil society that are selected as the leaders of civil society, as representatives of different places and organizations. And and there's also 20 online including Tariq Rauf who we interviewed for the class. And then there was another 20 people from Global Affairs Canada including different ambassadors in Geneva and so on. And all of them were—I got to admit—quite depressed because they are trying to figure out how to spend 15% less of their budget, including 15% less personnel. So, they were all, I would say, miserable. Wouldn't you, Leah? They were miserable at the world's situation and they were miserable about their own situations. Um, and it was sad, but students can still get jobs because all the younger ones had—were not worried; they were still going—going to be retained and so on. Did you want to mention about what they mean by Chatham House Rules when—when they announced at the beginning Chatham House Rules? They always do that; every single international forum is governed by Chatham House Rules. What's your understanding?

My understanding is that we can talk about the content that was discussed but cannot in—attribute it to who said it. So we can share information that we gained and use it in our work. However, we cannot say that we heard this fact from this source. We can't change government...

We—we have to remember when I asked that one question about the—the um China testing two nuclear weapons a week—that was said by someone. Well, I knew full well it was that person who was at the, you know, but I just said "by someone" and then he piped up, "but it was me" later. That was so funny. But anyway, then I—well I deliberately forgot it was you. Um, but it's that kind of informal discussion where we were—we are allowed to say that we spoke at length about China and we talked a lot about the "Golden Dome." Trump's vision of a Golden Dome. Um, what else do we talk about? It was a long discussion. Um, many, many things uh but—but the whole point being they are consulting with us in Ottawa and with different organizations. So I was very impressed. You spoke a couple of times by—by—and the way they do it is you have to put your name tag up and then the chair recognizes you and then they focus fully on you, including on the big screen. So there's four huge screens and then there's 12 screens in front of us. So it's blasting. Tell us a little bit about how you got up the courage to speak in—in front of such a large group of experts because you did really well twice.

Well, thank you very much, Erica. I—I feel very grateful um to have also been encouraged to speak by yourself and other members of civil society. Um in advance, I put some time into thinking about uh what priorities were going into the meeting and including um thinking about what other people were saying and having notes on things that I didn't want to be left unsaid. Um, one of which included the rolling back of Canada's feminist foreign policy, which is really disappointing in—in the context of global gender aggression. Um, that was the second remark and I—I waited till the end to see if it would come up by another.

Yeah, you waited and no one brought it up except for you, which was shocking. Um, it was like Trudeau's feminist policy just went out the window and then finally Leah brings it up and we all go, "Oh, oh, right. Oh, right. We're supposed to be talking about that." Oh, yeah. Good for you. Good for you.

Well, I mean, it—it's uh it's definitely a frightening time when there's so many issues at hand. Um, and but they're—they're all inextricably connected and I—I don't think it does nuclear disarmament any favors to be rolling back language on gender. I mean, I think a lot of also nuclear weapons dialogue is—is spoken about in a hyper masculine—masculine way. At least my perspective—not necessarily any of the orgs I work for—that they—by working on nuclear disarmament, you're—you're um furthering gender justice. And by working on gender justice, you're furthering um you're furthering disarmament policy.

And—and did you notice when you worked for International Physicians against—uh oh boy, IPPNW? Tell me again what it is. International... The International Physicians for the Prevention of Nuclear War Canada. Thank you. Okay, I keep forgetting. Um, did you notice that they were focused on a more feminist uh approach or—or a more gender—gender justice?

Yeah, I—I don't think—well I don't think anyone in the—or many people in the—or are against that approach by any means. The specifics of IPPNW is a health focus. So looking at nuclear weapons from a medical perspective um which I was very grateful to do and to learn in that space. It's very—it's evidence-based and—and speaking from the facts and it's a matter of fact that the only—the only way to cure a nuclear disaster is prevention. Medicine has nothing to offer in the face of—of nuclear warfare. So, um, for example, uh, like a a paralleled note would be that, uh, once, uh, the NRA tweeted, um, "doctors need to stay in their lane" and anti-gun—"doctors need to stay in their lane." Um, but it was, I think, um, a member of the American IPPNW tweeted back, um, "We are the people who see the bullet holes. We—we treat the outcomes." So, you know, prevention is the only way, and I think paralleled with—with nuclear weapons, the only way forward is—is a prohibition. Um but I was grateful to—while working with IPPNW—volunteer with Canadian Voice of Women for Peace, Women's International League for Peace and Freedom. Uh Ray Acheson, who you mentioned was in one of the photos—um read a lot of their writing. Carol Cohn—um I think feminist literature—and was a part of my thinking.

Very interesting. Well, what that does um uh lead me to talk—not—I—I'm so fascinated by this, but we do have to keep our recording to approximately 15 minutes—is um if you—you were the Executive Director and now you're—you're actually going back to school to do more physics and you were telling me that you're learning more French, 10 hours a week of French. So, I was wondering why you're doing that. Do you think that you need to be fluently bilingual? Because I noticed last week in Ottawa that most of the foreign service officers were not fluently bilingual—only a few. But then you could see that their careers might be advancing quicker. Um, so that was—one of my—has always been my thought that if you are fluently bilingual—and French is your first language too—then that gives you more opportunities not just in uh the Department of Global Affairs Canada now, but also in the Department of National Defense or in the Privy Council Office. Do you want to talk a little bit about why you're learning French?

Yeah, happily. Um, I mean, I feel like French is a really good—a very practical investment of my time. So, I'm trying to get to the level of fluency as fast as possible. Um, I think I—I stepped down from my IPPNWC to take a little time to invest in my own education. I don't think that's something I'll ever regret. And I, yeah, French feels like a very practical use for many fields. I know I want to work internationally or at a minimum um on international issues. Um and to be able to speak in both Canada's second language and a UN language feels—feels worthwhile.

That's great. That's really positive. Um and I've told the students before about the Explore program that they can apply for uh in order to take French at a university—even in New Brunswick uh or even in Toronto at Glendon. And you're learning French as well. Are you—what program are you using? Just for the students to know, is it Duolingo?

Sure. Yeah, I—I uh I actually did Explore a couple years ago. I highly recommend that as well. Um and I use Duolingo and also I'm taking courses in my community in Montreal. Um... Yes, you're in Montreal, so therefore you're being immersed right away. Oh, that's wonderful. Um well, thank you, Leah. I really appreciate this opportunity and I'm sure you motivated uh students to think about working—if they can't work for the UN or let's say they're a nurse or they're—they're in uh aviation. Can they somehow—can work for what you said the other day—the greater good? What can—you want to end on those kind of comments about how people can perhaps—not even—you don't have to work for the UN to work for the greater good?

Absolutely. I mean, there's a role for all of us to play. There's no one-size-fits-all or one path to—to contributing to nuclear disarmament or these issues at large. Um I say just find what you're passionate about, find—find it what you're passionate about, find what you're good at, whether that's writing, whether that's art, whether that's science, whether that's health, and um find—be creative in—in applying it. And we need people from all different backgrounds thinking about these issues um and working on them. You know, the—the chances are that we'll only be able to make a small difference, but it's very important that you try and make that small difference because it's going to take all of us um in order to—to protect our world and especially in the state of current affairs. So, um I hope—I hope that—I hope that...

Well, those words are very, very inspiring and I—and I want to thank you again Leah for taking time out of—out of this very, very busy day for coming on and also um I wish you luck in the future with whatever endeavors you take on. I'm sure you'll be very successful. Thank you.

Thanks for the invitation. Happy to be here.