**Transcript 5A**

Welcome to lesson 5A, uh, 5.1 introduction to the United Nations and Global Governance. So, we've moved from peacekeeping to talking more now about the United Nations and peacekeeping, the UN budget, and we'll also then be moving forward to talk about global governance. So, here's a picture of the United Nations Security Council, which I'll explain in a few minutes what that is. And this is the corridors of the UN. As you can see, pe—there's a—people are not allowed to leave papers like this and information. So that's highly unusual.

I put a picture here of the United Nations. Um, the Secretariat, the Security Council, and the General Assembly are the main parts of the UN in the UN building here. So, I'm not going to explain too much about the function of the Secretariat, but I am going to talk quite a lot about the General Assembly and the Security Council. Here's a picture that I took of the UN Rose Garden on the Hudson River. The—the um—Rose Garden itself is not any longer open to the public, only to registered diplomats with a security card. And because of the lack of land and also, I would say, because of the movement of President Trump to criticize the United Nations—heavily criticize it—that land may someday have to be sold and made into apartments, and maybe the UN will move to Ottawa. We don't know why, because President Trump is very, very critical of the United Nations.

He addressed the—we call them sessions of the United Nations General Assembly. He's addressed it before, as has President Biden and President Obama and um—soon Prime Minister Carney, possibly. Uh, he delivered his remarks on September 23rd, 2025. And that's a picture of him just as he's delivering the remarks. And here he is talking about how the United Nations—he—he essentially blasts it. So, I did put a link in the previous video, but I'm not asking you to go to the White House and watch the entire video. Uh, it's very long and he suggests that the United Nations either ignored or exasperated problems—made them worse around the world—and that he has to—these are being left to him to fix. "What is the purpose of the United Nations?" Trump asked. It is not even coming close to living up to potential. Uh, and in his speech, which was very typical as we've learned about President Trump, he meanders about complaining and also complained that, um, he lost a contract, uh, to, um, renovate the UN headquarters. He claims that he, um, worked to end seven wars. So now he's saying he's ended eight wars, but without any help from the United Nations. So we're not going to watch his speech.

And what I'm going to do instead is welcome you as—as a diplomat, uh, coming into the United Nations. And there's a view of the Hudson River in Manhattan. I'm hoping to do a short supplementary video which introduces you to the–the location of the UN in Manhattan and to the other sites around it with, um, a person who actually knows, uh, New York City extremely well. So, we're going to be doing that next week when I come back from Ottawa.

The UN General Assembly is very evocative. You always know you're there because of the green everywhere, the green carpets. And this is the General Assembly. And this is the front of the UN. I took these pictures of peacekeepers wearing the classic blue beret, or they wear the blue helmet. And you can see the army and the air force, the navy. Uh, here you can see more peacekeepers at the United Nations. And here you can see the UN General Assembly from where the third floor—where, uh, you sit to watch the debate and that's the front where the Secretary General sits and you can see—you can see live—whoever is talking. Who has been the longest-serving Secretary General? U Thant. He served for 10 years. So that's why it's important that we're talking to Peggy Mason, because she served as an ambassador for, uh, many years, not quite 10, but then since then she's been working on the UN. So I really can't get a better expert, uh, than Ambassador Mason.

When I say "get," I mean invite to our class. So she will be referring to the P5, which are five of the countries, uh, that are in the UN Security Council and they have permanent membership in that council, which is a smaller group, and there they are: China, France, the United Kingdom, the United States, and Russia. Where can you find and talk to a P5 diplomat? Perhaps, uh, Ambassador Mason will tell us a little bit about that and also about working with the Canadian delegation which she headed. So we will, I hope, hear about how to find Canadian delegates at the United Nations.

And then also, uh, this is the basement, uh, where they have different conference rooms. I have often held panels and participated in panels in conference rooms C and D in the basement, and that is interesting because they don't have Zoom facilities. They don't have computers. You have to bring your own—actually have to bring your own screens. Only lately did they get a screen. So, it's very primitive, actually. It's like a high school from 60 years ago. You can also see diplomats at the UN cafeteria. Here's the American delegation, uh, talking in the cafeteria. And I'll show you another photo. There they are talking. And—and you could, I suppose, go up to them, but they also for private meetings have their own dining rooms at the UN.

Let me give you some more background about the P5. So the P5, the permanent members, can veto any substantive—of any important matter that is presented to the UN Security Council. We'll talk more about the United Nations being a "talk shop" because many, uh, resolutions that are substantive are—are vetoed by the P5, or one of the members of the P5. Any one of them can veto. In addition to the P5, there are 10 non-permanent members of the UN Security Council that are elected on a two-year, uh, basis for two-year terms, and they're voted on by the UN General Assembly. Canada often tries to become a member of the rotating Security Council. We haven't been successful recently. Whenever we fail, the media call me and ask why. But the real explanation is that the UN General Assembly votes and so there's a lot of lobbying done and so on.

Um, what languages do you need to operate to understand the debate? Well, six. There's six languages, simultaneous translation into six languages at the UN. This is the, uh, kind of silence room, prayer room, uh, where at the UN it's non—non-denominational. It's not Christian or, um, Buddhist. It's, uh, a small room close to a—a very famous stained glass by Chagall.

Okay, where is the center of the UN? The center, the heart of the UN, is as I mentioned this green room, the General Assembly. And that's where all state parties—each country that is recognized is called a state party. And it can send representatives to participate in sessions. So here, this is each—the countries are all in alphabetical order. Uh, and then here, up here on the third floor, is civil society and representatives of NGOs. And then here's journalists and, uh, newspaper, uh, reporters. So they re—vote, and a resolution requires a majority to pass. We'll talk more about that later with a majority and so on.

The United Nations was established in San Francisco in 1945 at the end of World War II, and its headquarters was eventually moved from London, England—not London, Ontario—to New York City. Where is it in New York City? That's—I put a map here. So if you are familiar with New York City, I showed you the Hudson River there. Um, and that's the UN. The Trump Towers tower over Manhattan, uh, very, very much–much bigger than–than the United Nations and quite close by.

Uh, here's a picture of Jim Wurst, who was a very good writer, uh, who worked a lot at the United Nations along with another guy I know, Randy Rydell—people who can write very, very well and get people to agree on resolutions. Put him there because, uh, this was during a debate about, um, the—oh, this is the United Nations and see all the reporters they're waiting for diplomats to come out, but usually diplomats don't speak to reporters. So then because I'm an academic and I don't mind speaking to reporters, you'd be sitting—I'd be like—when there's breaking news, all these reporters ask you for interviews and so on because they're just looking for the story. The diplomats often can't say anything.

Okay. What's the budget affecting the—or the budget is approximately 1.2 billion, which is not a lot of money. Okay. What are the issues affecting the budget? The budget. Um, well, first of all, um, the budget can be—every country has—is an—has an assessment or a debt or a due, and, uh, a lot of countries have unpaid contributions. I didn't invite a financial expert to speak to us about the UN's financial problems, but this—these are very significant. So, I'm putting a bit here more than Peggy Mason will speak about. Uh, some of my students have worked at the UN. And I remember one told me that the UN doesn't have enough money to even run the lights on the weekend, which I found hard to believe, but he was probably true.

Okay, here's some, um, uh, diplomats, uh, at—on—on the third floor. And then this is a negotiating room. Uh, so the UN has the principal organs of the—u—sorry, UN headquarters, and that is as I mentioned the General Assembly, the Security Council. Now, where is the ICJ? Let's say you want to work for the International Court of Justice. That has its seat in The Hague. The UN also has three additional subsidiary regional headquarters: Geneva, Vienna, and Nairobi. So, I imagine that Ambassador Mason was—lived probably in—in Vienna. Uh, and then, um, Tariq Rauf lives in Geneva. So a lot of people find it very expensive in New York City, including all the embassies, and indeed, uh, the United Nations rents its land from the United States. So it's extraterritorial.

Who can vote at the UN today? Can individuals vote? No. Can significant people? Uh, no. There's no parliamentary assembly of people. The only people, or the only ones that can vote, are on be—one vote per a country. And there are some very, very tiny countries that get to vote. Uh, so under Article 19 of the UN Charter, a member state that's in arrears—meaning it has not paid its dues—is supposed to not be able to vote, but that is not imposed. In fact, the United States has not paid its dues in years and years and years, and yet it still gets to vote and exert a veto.

Uh, so I think the best way to learn about the UN is to read this handbook, the GA handbook. It explains all the tiny rules of the UN and all the important ones, and I highly recommend reading it even if you don't intend to work at the UN. For example, let's say the United Nations is undergoing the silence procedure. Well, if you're working at the UN, you don't know what that is unless you read the GA handbook. So the GA handbook explains that that's a phase at the end of the negotiations, and I remember this because the section is sitting there and everyone is either calling their—their capitals or trying to obtain final approval. Remember that the UN is in, um, Eastern Standard Time like us. So many capitals are—are 10 or 15 hours ahead, or it's the weekend. So that can affect the discussions. But anyway, once the draft resolution—I'll teach you what a resolution is in a moment—is declared to be under the silence procedure, then, um, uh, it is automatically approved by the Sec Gen. So there's no voting. There's no, um, voting. I just put my hand up.

Can you vote at the UN today? So here's the journalists waiting for everyone to come out, and then are they voting in favor or not? Imagine the silence procedure like a kind of chat discussion where everyone says, "Okay, here's the draft resolution. Speak now or—or hold your peace," and then everyone goes silent and says nothing—no emojis, nothing. So, everyone collectively kind of silently agrees that the resolution should pass. That's how most of the resolutions are passed now. It's kind of a consensus. So, let's say you're working at the UN and you're looking around. You do not put your hand up and vote against something, you know, if everyone seems cool with it, then well, you know, you—you probably should—should be—should be watching what's happening and—and—and listening to your capital. So, the silence procedure is basically diplomacy's answer to "if nobody says anything, we're all good, right?"

Okay. I'm still on the topic of who can vote. Well, this little tiny little, uh—
**Transcript 5B**

5B on the United Nations: a primer. So, we're learning about the United Nations more, especially about peacekeeping. What is the Preamble of the UN Charter that was written in 1945? Well, it states its founding intention is to "save succeeding Generations from the scourge of War." This means to save future generations from the horror of warfare. It's not there because of Western desires to, let's say, ensure lower tariffs or liberty or democracy; it's there to prevent conflict and to promote lasting peace.

Why do I say that? Because exact wording counts, and if you listen carefully to Ambassador Mason and Professor Dorn, you'll hear them weigh their words very carefully. They're always making sure that what they write and what they say—very, very careful people. Similarly to these Canadians pictured here who are employed to try to interpret what the UN is saying, uh, and they have a newsletter called "Reaching Critical Will." Very—a lot of, uh, diplomats pay more attention to them; it's easier. Ray Acheson—she's actually from Huron College. She learned to write at Huron—congratulations.

Okay, moving on, talking about the blue helmets of the peacekeepers, the white tanks, and the current UN Ambassador Bob Rae, uh, who was an NDPer but is now the, uh—appointed by the Liberal government to be the ambassador. You can see him there, and there's another picture of him in front of the UN flag. So the UN flag is blue, and the main conflict provisions are in chapters 6 and 7 of the UN Charter.

Let's talk about Chapter VI, which encourages member states to resolve their disputes by different methods, and these might be negotiations, mediation; they might be arbitration. Think of these as different ways to resolve conflict, and they have their "other peaceful means." So these are approaches that are valid, and they are representative of peaceful dispute resolution, not threats and war.

Chapter VII of the UN Charter is—is—is key to the UN's collective security function. The UN is a collective security organization; it's not a collective defense organization. So under Chapter VII of the Charter, the UN Security Council can call on member states to implement measures that do not involve the use of force, such as a ceasefire. Um, measures often take the form of sanctions, and Adrien Blanchard will talk to us about these sanctions against Russia and many other countries that he's involved in imposing. Uh, that's another guest speaker that we have that I'm excited about coming to talk about embargoes, restrictions on financial interactions, and restriction on access to overseas assets, which has been done.

Okay, Article 4 can be invoked—this is the article of the UN Charter that permits the Security Council to actually authorize the use of force, including armed peacekeepers, if non-military measures prove inadequate. How can those actions take place? By air, sea, or land, such as demonstrations, blockades, and other operations that are carried out by UN member states to maintain or restore international peace and security—peace and security.

What does "invoked" mean? Uh, invoked means to cite or appeal to something as an authority. So I put a picture here of Antonio Guterres, the current Sec Gen, and here he is invoking. Uh, so they're considered to—to—to be trying to—they're an authority and they're trying to make an argument. Here are some diplomats arguing about the wording for invoking. They're arguing—I—that's what it is at the UN. You can see them with these pieces of paper arguing; it's quite cool.

Here's UN Secretary General Antonio Guterres. He invoked, uh, Article 99, which has hardly ever been invoked before. Um, indeed, according to the UN spokesperson, it has not been used for decades. Guterres reiterated his appeal for a humanitarian, uh, ceasefire in the Gaza Strip under Article 99 of the UN Charter, uh, in order—and this was urgent because the—he argued the civilian population must be spared from greater harm. Well, that ceasefire never came into place.

The Department of Peacekeeping Operations could have been invoked and brought into the Gaza Strip, or it could, uh, be invoked in, uh, any kind of conflict—Nepal. Uh, we'll talk more about the different UN peacekeeping operations currently, but DPKO is where Ambassador Peggy Mason has worked for many years. She's very, very familiar with it and, uh, she's going to talk to us about different peacekeeping operations. Right now, there's 11 of them led by DPKO—they always say DPKO—and this is notable given that peacekeeping was never actually explicitly mentioned in the UN Charter. Yet it's the cornerstone; it's extremely important to the UN's efforts to maintain international peace and security.

This is a very useful site: "United Nations Peacekeeping.org: What is Peacekeeping?" for learning about UN peacekeeping, and it changes very frequently. For example, last year's course notes say that there were—are, uh, 12 peacekeeping operations; now there's 11. And if you select 12 on the quiz, well then it's wrong, and so it's very important to listen to the lectures and update your notes. Don't rely on notes from previous years.

I have talked for years about UNEF I, and that's because, uh, it's a very famous crisis, uh, involving the Hungarian crisis and the Suez crisis, and Dr., uh, Dorn will explain it in a bit more detail, I'm hoping. But that was the first United Nations Emergency Force, called UNEF I, and that was the first time that peacekeeping forces were used. Canada actually, uh, contributed forces to UNEF I. Canada contributed forces because of—uh, he wasn't Prime Minister yet, but, uh—Lester B. Pearson was a diplomat who provided a draft resolution and presented it to the General Assembly for approval. And that was—he wrote it, and that move was pivotal in the development of modern peacekeeping efforts. Canada eventually got, actually, the Nobel Peace Prize in 1958 for proposing a UN peacekeeping force. So there's, uh—uh—Pearson with the Nobel Peace Prize back in 1958, well before he became Prime Minister.

What about traditional first-generation peacekeeping? We—we don't use this nomenclature so much anymore, but, uh, perhaps, uh, Peggy will say first, second, third, fourth generation peacekeeping. Uh, let's talk about what that is. Traditional peacekeeping. Traditional, uh, first-generation peacekeeping was, uh, impartial, so both sides were supposed to be, uh, neutral, or all sides were supposed to remain neutral. Um, now peacekeepers can be fighting for the state or against rebels; they may not be neutral. But then, back then, they were supposed to be neutral. Back then, they were supposed to be lightly armed. That meant that they were not armed with, uh, guns or tanks; they were supposed to be actually minimal. Um, and in the end, some peacekeepers got hacked to death along the North Korean demilitarized zone—I saw that area myself, um, because they were not able to defend themselves. It also used to require all parties' approval; for example, in Cyprus, all the parties, Turkey and Greece, were supposed to be in agreement for the peacekeeping force. And it's supposed to be non-territorial in that it's supposed to avoid seizing territory, but now it can. So peacekeeping has definitely evolved from the 1940s and 50s, 60s.

And what is the second generation? The second generation, beginning in the 1990s. This is kind of the height of peacekeeping in the world, 1990 to 95. Third generation here. Um, basically they expanded it to include enforcement, which some people will say is robust peacekeeping, and some people will call modern peacekeeping where it's much more, uh, robust, much more, um, violent. And then third generation is more complex and focuses on peacebuilding. A lot of people don't use "third generation" very properly. And then fourth generation is when you're trying to build a state, you're trying—like Afghanistan—and you're trying to build in all sorts of electoral activities and voting. Uh, you're having regional organizations involved and so on. So most peacekeeping now is fourth generation.

But let's go back to second generation. So, second-generation modern peacekeeping—here you can see that they are armed, they may not be neutral, they are deployed between states or within states, uh, they can operate without consent if no central government agrees to it—like in Afghanistan, there was no central government for a while. They can use force, and then they can be deployed doing electoral monitoring or humanitarian relief. Dr. Dorn has a great deal of experience, uh, on electoral support, humanitarian operations in, um—uh—I can't quite remember if it was Nepal, I can't point remember where—oh, East Timor. He was involved in the election in—in East Timor. He might tell you about that because it was extremely disturbing. Uh, he was on CBC Radio when he was in East Timor and watched people being burned alive in a church. I'm not sure that we'll talk about that.

But let's talk about UNAMIR, UNAMIR, UNAMIR, which some people say was a total failure, uh, because it failed to prevent the genocide in Rwanda. So was it a failure? The genocide in—in Rwanda. Um, okay, so following the creation of a—here's Romeo Dallaire, who was the general in charge of the peacekeeping operation, who happened to be a Canadian General, Romeo Dallaire. And he appealed to the UN for peacekeeping troops, for—for anything, for any kind of help, um, in the operation. And so how many did he get? If this was a multiple-choice question: zero. He got absolutely zero. No countries committed to try to prevent the genocide in Rwanda. Zero. No countries. I say that with great emphasis because at that time it was just a terrible, terrible situation. Terrible. In October 1993, six months after, he's still calling for troops. UNAMIR deployed 550 troops. So how many troops did the UN deploy in Rwanda in the end? 550 people. That's it. You think that there would have—the world would have come to their aid and had—would have deployed as many as in Afghanistan, tens of thousands; but no, only 550 people.

Now, Romeo Dallaire says that he could have prevented Rwanda's genocide with just 5,000 troops if—if the United Nations had said that. And he was quite traumatized by that. Uh, he has what's called Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder, PTSD, and this is a mental health disorder due to having, uh, witnessed the genocide and—and literally thousands of people being killed, driving through, uh, streets of—of tortured and killed people. Um, I put a picture here of Thinkers' Lodge, which is in Nova Scotia, which is run by the International Pugwash Movement and the Canadian government. And I was at a conference with Romeo Dallaire seated right there, and I'm an early riser; I was up at about 5:00 in the morning and he came out and was talking to me right there and he said he couldn't sleep—he often—that just the images of all the, uh, slaughtered people, uh, kept him awake.

Okay, so Canada, uh, decided, uh, to put together a proposal for a rapid reaction capability for the UN, and this was a proposal that was presented by the government of Canada to the United Nations. But the United States opposed it and—and behind the scenes, um, pushed countries to vote against it. I was very intimately involved in—in the writing of this in Montebello, and that was due to my work on the peacekeeping training center. But, um, also the report is still, I think, interesting, but you don't have to look at it.

I've worked on a whole bunch of different proposals to do with peacekeeping, and I—I was making a list here, um, since 1991. And even a few weeks ago, I wrote an article for the Globe and Mail on, um—2024, "A peacekeeping force could be the innovation the Canada-US border needs," which the Globe and Mail published. Uh, so I've worked on a UN emergency force, the responsibility—R2P—and so on. So when I talked to Peggy, um, we do tend to use the language of peacekeeping a bit, and this primer gives you some of those words ahead of time. I'm not expecting you to be an expert on peacekeeping, but I want you to—to be enthusiastic about something like that.

Okay, what would you contribute? Let's say you were a country or you're acting on behalf of a delegation. Um, you can look at the CIA World Factbook and it will give you the, uh, numbers of military personnel and the kind of equipment that your country has. Let's say you're representing Chad or—or something like that. Um, so let's say if your—pretend you're a country. I don't know what country you want to be: India, Jamaica, Trinidad—
# Transcript 5C

Welcome everyone to uh 5C or 5.3 where we are preparing you to represent Canada or another country and how to write resolutions. So this is the back of the UN where only diplomats are allowed to go. There's a lot of sculptures and there's the Noah's Ark. Uh you can see that we've done a bit of preliminary work on 5A and 5B. And now I want to just do a little bit more in-depth work before our guest speaker Leah Holla talks to us.

When she's talking to us, I show this slide so you can see it now and study it. When she's talking to us, I show this slide which is her background and also it has the contact address for the United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs. And I show this uh as a picture because it's very important. Very seldom do you see students knowing a UN resolution, profiting from the UN resolution, turning that into South Korea—the Republic of Korea—giving $10 million for uh education and then she is with other distinguished speakers as you can see at the UN launching this. So, I wanted to ask her to come and I was really pleased that she agreed to speak to our class here in uh London, Ontario.

Let me mention I showed her this and she'll talk a little bit about that. And I showed her this and I showed her that as a final slide and then we got to business talking about last week's consultations. And we also talked a little bit about the numbers of youth that are working at the UN and that thus the dress code becoming more informal, people using their telephones everywhere now and fewer restrictions.

That leads me to talk about UN procedures for simulations, not just for the United Nations, but if you ever get the opportunity to participate in a UN sim—uh a model UN—that is great. It doesn't have to be at the UN, it could be uh in a classroom. So for years I ran a UN assembly with 140 students that I taught and I'm very sad that I can't do that anymore because of the numbers that we have here online, but English. Okay, so there's six languages at the UN and obviously at the UN simulation you tend to use English. Should you stand up and speak in French or Spanish? Of course you could do so.

Uh what about credentials? Um, so most people who speak at the UN here in the UN General Assembly are representing their country. They have to be very careful what they say in this room and they have to stick to the script. They cannot go off in a direction that they want to go off in and they have to call their country all the time even though there's a different time zone and just check that they can vote and so on. For example, Egypt has to always check even if it's a different time zone, but they're very very good. Uh the Egyptians have an excellent foreign service and their officers are amazing and their ambassadors are amazing in terms of speaking in English.

What about participating? A non-member state would be a country—would be Palestine. And Palestine officially at the United Nations does not yet have the same rights as those of full members like the 193 state parties. So those countries can attend but they cannot vote on substantive issues. They can vote on procedural issues. A quorum is a simple majority of the members that are there. So in the case of the UN General Assembly, um if there's 31 people there then the quorum is half of 31—15.5—so 16 people plus one. A quorum will be assumed to be present. Okay, so you know later you'll learn about quorums but uh you know people always say, "Oh, is there enough people here? Do we have a quorum?" Um what that means is, are there enough people according to the constitution?

Obviously delegates will show up and in the UN model UN tend to—they were very disrespectful often. Um you are now allowed to use telephones. We used to say no and you should obviously turn off your cell phone. The first order of business is the agenda. So what's going to be on the agenda first? It's—you think of it like Robert's Rules of Order. We have to agree on the agenda. The United Nations Conference on Disarmament has not agreed on an agenda in over two decades. They can't even agree what they're going to talk about. So they don't even talk about what they're going to talk about because they can't agree on the agenda. All those diplomats in Geneva living the high life.

Okay. Then the resolution that's first on the agenda, that's what we're going to be talking about today is the agenda. So, a motion to discuss the resolution on the agenda is put on the table. There's the—well, here the dais is the speaker. Um and it's usually the Secretary-General, but because the Secretary-General can't always be there, they rotate in. The House of Commons does the same. They rotate in the Speaker of the House, often sitting there falling asleep, a different person listening to everything. So they have to be there present. Um in simulations usually the motions that have the most number of signatories will be debated first. But this is not true at the UN. There they have a definite agenda and there's different motions that are to be debated. In a simulation they will have a for and against speakers list to debate each motion. But at the UN there is a speakers list for and against. Um but it's governed slightly differently in that you typically when you speak for a resolution you're in favor of it. You're not against it.

Okay. Then there's always this thing about closing the debate. It's the Secretary-General who feels the room—the consensus in the room—or that the motion is ready for a vote. So they're responsible for doing that. You can't just put up your hand and say, "I move that we close the debate." You can do that in regular meetings and that's a strategy and people will all go, "No no no, you can't do that," or they'll vote on it. Once the agenda has been determined there's an open speakers list and closure of debate. Um I put my face here on purpose. You don't really need to know the closure of debate rules governing debate suspension. There's a lot here on suspension because in the old model UNs you used that a lot. But in the UN General Assembly today, pictured here—there's the UN with all the flags and here's the UN Security Council, not the UN General Assembly debating. Um, so postponement—two-thirds of a vote to pass.

So here's some more rules. And I don't want you to memorize these rules. I'm not going to ask you questions about right of reply, but speeches must be made in the third person. For example, "Afghanistan argues that the United States should not withdraw," "The United States states," not "I" or "we." Um, if you're not there, then you forfeit your time, which means you need—the Speaker of the House in Canada has a whip, a person who whips everyone to get in on the right time. But here, the UN does not have that. They call you and they have speakers and intercoms.

Privilege. You can rise on a point of personal privilege where you interrupt because something like the building—there's a smoke alarm going on or the speaker is inaudible somehow. They have speakers and they have simultaneous translation and everybody here has a speaker in their ear, a microphone in their ear. A point of order where you indicate improper parliamentary procedure—believe me, that doesn't happen at the UN. Um points of parliamentary inquiry to ask a question regarding the rules of procedure—that's a stalling tactic and they won't allow you to do that at the UN, but that's a popular thing to do at simulations.

Signatories. Um okay. So when they start to vote, usually there's a draft, there's a roll call, and they publicize how many signatories they need to pass something. In a UN simulation, you can sign a draft resolution, but it's when you finally sign that it really counts. Let us learn to write a UN resolution. So, we're going to kind of talk about how to do so using uh my latest proposal published in the Globe and Mail on a made-in-Canada peacekeeping force in Canada. Uh so, it's a useful skill. Um it would be along the 49th parallel. Anyway, to do this as a writer, you must understand the content. So, you cannot just put the information from a PowerPoint into chat and say, "Write a UN resolution." You need to understand the content. And I really want to emphasize with you that many of you are using AI to write letters and to write resolutions and to write all sorts of things. But you still need to understand the content so that you can engage with other delegations and change the wording. Every nuance is important. Every word, every sentence—you wouldn't believe how important that is.

Uh so here's my latest proposal, a bold proposal that—well actually I think the Globe and Mail said an innovative proposal—but they published it and I'm getting a lot of calls. "How can Canada defend itself?" Toronto Star today and last week on and on, they're very concerned about defending ourselves and Belgium and different places. Anyway, so it's the longest undefended world boundary. Uh and then we have an economic statement where we need to figure out how to distribute um these sorts of things. Um okay.

Um okay. So here I'm calling for the establishment of a made-in-Canada peacekeeping force. You can immediately see the problems with all that. You've taken some peacekeeping with me already. But I'm saying it would be neutral. Would it be passed at the UN? Readers don't even think about that. They're just thinking that I've lost my mind. But I'm saying here that it would foster global cooperation and innovation and it would draw inspiration. So here what I'm saying is we would actually draw from Canadians. Uh we wouldn't draw from the global south. Most UN peacekeeping operations are cheaper because those combat-capable soldiers are trained and they are paid very little by their host countries. So let's say these people are from Bangladesh. Bangladesh has very cheap peacekeepers. But I'm saying Canada would do so using people from local communities. So immediately a red flag because you know that's not going to pass at the UN.

Okay. So then I go on—the soldiers trained in—trained somehow—peacekeeping training, international stewardship. Of course they would not don the UN's blue helmets—iconic blue helmets—because there would be a Security Council veto. So we know that such an initiative would be vetoed by the United States and probably Russia and China because it would have implications for their own territorial conquests. It would be vetoed by China because of China's interests with Taiwan and so they don't want a peacekeeping force in Taiwan. Similarly, the US would veto it.

So, keeping that in mind, I veer off into how this could engage young people and perhaps even the United States. People from the United States might come over and be interested in universal healthcare, progressive values. There I go on and on. And this is the kicker because, of course, many people would love to have a one-year visa program. And if that would be a way to draw them in from Ivy League schools or from countries that have lots of money, that would foster cultural exchange and mutual learning. You're already guessing that I'm advocating for this based on a Katimavik program that was very successful way back then where we trained youth to travel across Canada and serve as peacekeepers, border guards, interpreters, and they even um cleared trails in national parks.

So here I'm getting more, you know, enthusiastic about where this force would be, which would be obviously along the 49th parallel. Uh, and also would it be in Alberta? I write here—I skipped Alberta because I wasn't sure Alberta would agree and went straight to British Columbia's old growth forests here and argued that they would be in the prairies. So see how you can kind of get away with that. And they might study languages such as Spanish, promoting cross-cultural understanding and enhancing North America's ability. So it's still not going to pass at the UN, everyone. It has no hope of passing at the UN.

A lot of people are used to talking about AI now, just trying to get everything through with AI and talking about drones and so on. So I put that in about drones. We are spending money on drones and drones are very much talked about. Last week at Global Affairs Canada we spent a considerable amount of time talking about drones and obviously we would have RCMP and defense personnel. They would be helping the peacekeepers. They would all be trained in de-escalation diplomacy and so on. So you can see this is not going to pass. It's not going to pass in the House of Parliament either. It would be opposed by the Conservatives. I think the Liberals might pass it um eventually and the Greens and the NDP, but I was at the House of Parliament last week and visited it on Monday and they couldn't even agree on the criminal—there's a criminal legislation that was going through this. I watched it for a while for about an hour and a half. Uh, so they couldn't agree on criminal prosecutions. So here I'm writing about fentanyl. So basically you're getting the impression that this is not going to happen.

Um, what am I saying here? Oh, our shared commitment. This is just rhetoric by me. And then I'm just talking about this. So this is the world's longest uh symbol of peacekeeping coexistence because we have this border. So don't ever forget students that this is the border. The United States owns this territory, Alaska, and this territory. Don't forget that. And that's what makes this the longest border stretching over here. Maintaining the status quo is no longer sufficient and people are worried. But I'm being polite. A Team Canada initiative supported by cutting-edge technology would serve as a powerful symbol. So, could we get that passed at the UN with a "made in Canada" label? No. You could write the best resolution in the world and it's not going to get passed.

Guarding a legacy of peace. Um well, yes. So, we do need to reinforce our reputation as a peacekeeping leader. We're not demonstrating leadership at the UN anymore on that. As the world faces an increasingly uncertain future... Do you like my pictures here? Uh, with millions of people dying—so I didn't put any people dying in Gaza. I can't upset you. I would have to put a disclaimer on here. I didn't put any people dying in Chechnya, uh, in Israel, in Ukraine, possibly Taiwan. Look at these benign shots. But there we are, leading by example. And then I of course resort to the past, which I did today for the Toronto Star. I started talking about the history of Pearsonian internationalism and peacekeeping training centers and how we need to move forward into a world of middle powers cooperating in the wake of Davos toward more and more cooperation and middle powermanship—leading by example rather than pouring billions—and literally they're talking about the US budget—is now nearly $1 trillion every year. And the world spends—I think it's—I'll have to look that up so I don't say it right now but essentially right now—I'll talk about it in a few weeks—we—this would be something that we could invest in instead of, let's say, space defense.

We talked a lot last week about the "golden dome" and that concept—I was quite surprised how much we talked about it. This was the consultation with Global Affairs Canada. Most importantly it would reaffirm the shared values of peace and cooperation that have long defined the Canada-US defense relationship. Leading by example. So now is the time to act. Okay. In—here we are. Um this is changing even today. A reporter called me today—or no, a television station—and they wanted to talk about um new attacks here on Zaporizhzhia by Russia despite the ceasefire and so on. And then I write here, "instead of waiting for hypothetical situations such as an attempt by President Trump to seize Canada or to annex the country, we must take proactive steps, leading by example."

Um, yeah. So, here I'm using the word Great Powers—published in the Globe and Mail—and they kept the "G" and the "P," which is a new world that we've entered. Okay. So, how to write a resolution at the UN? I showed you the pictures here at the front of the UN and the UN assembly. And when the UN was created, remember in 1945, there were only 51 member states—that didn't include the whole world. Now, it does. And so there are 193 right now. Roughly 80% of the General Assembly resolutions are adopted by consensus. That is without taking a vote. They don't put their hands up. They just agree.

Let me talk about that. So this whole old way of having a majority 50% plus one—that was very popular in UN simulations because you could win or lose simply by one vote after a majority. And people didn't care about or try to understand what Mexico thought; people didn't think about uh what Syria thought and so on. But now the UN runs by consensus more and delegates are much more concerned about the viewpoints of others and they want compromise. They take—they try—because you have to have a consensus in order to implement this. So you might as well try and get it at the UN. Given the dramatic increase in member states over time, reaching consensus is vital. These are some um behind-the-scenes photos where the diplomats work. These are the committees and so on. First Committee and so on. They meet in these kind of smaller rooms. Because the General Assembly's resolutions are recommendations and not legally binding on member states, reaching consensus has evolved as a way to ensure the widest possible implementation of General Assembly decisions.

In model UN simulations they do not consider implementation and so they tend to argue and be opposed. Most resolutions at model UN conferences are adopted by a vote. But if we are now trying to teach consensus—and you cannot truly understand the UN as an institution without understanding that it has evolved toward trying to reach consensus just as NATO tries to reach consensus.

How do you format your resolution? Uh AI will do this for you now. You can put it in and just test it and you'll see that it will write anything that you write as a resolution, marginalizing it and doing the wording. So practice with AI and do some draft resolutions. Format your resolution so that uh a resolution begins with the General Assembly and then there are what are called preambular phrases that describe the problem being addressed and explain it. So it recalls, it explains the purpose of the resolution, and that all offers support for the operative—what is the UN going to do? So the operative clauses that follow—each clause in the preamble begins with an underlined word and ends with a comma—and Chat will do that all for you. Now operative clauses are numbered and state the action to be taken by the body. These clauses all begin with strong words, strong present tense words. Uh so those are followed by a semicolon except for the last, which ends with a period. There should be no periods in the body of the resolution. Well, put your resolution into AI and make sure that it does it properly.

Here are some delegates about to—I was actually here so I took the photo. You can see the countries are all lined up there alphabetically. There's China and they're about to receive the draft document in 2010. Um, so you'll hear the guest speaker refer to another Security Council resolution 2150. And that's how they run off your lips—you just know all the numbers. It's crazy. Uh so this is some sample resolutions here um that I want to show you. So there you see the title of the resolution and don't copy your resolutions from previous resolutions and then hand them in as if they're new. Don't do that, but learn from them. So there's the preambular phrases: recalling and concern. So there's nothing operative there. Noting... recognizing... So this resolution goes on for pages—two more pages—and then it concludes with its operative clauses. So what are they? António Guterres is looking straight for those operative clauses. So here you can see everyone's flipping to the end and the tension is high because they're looking and they're suddenly discovering that there's 64 operative clauses, which is unprecedented in 2010. It's unbelievable really that they'd agreed on 64 operative clauses.

So anyway, here it is. This is another sample resolution. And here these were written by my students and they only had five sponsors. So in my UN simulation, it would not be—we would not discuss it. You have to have consensus and this is not enough consensus uh to get this at that time. Now of course there's 99 countries that have signed the TPNW and they've actually agreed to a new treaty that's very similar to this. So that's interesting. In 99 countries, the TPNW. So, this is back in 2010. They're phoning back to their capitals right there and they're getting information about what they should do and if they should proceed.

Here's some resolutions from previous years in my classroom uh where they couldn't even get, you know, "Be it resolved that the UN declare war on Iran." Uh that was in the past and now of course the United States government and Israel are considering bombing Iran for regime change and that's a big threat. So here's that resolution, but it didn't get anywhere. Sample resolutions from my model UNs. This one was interesting because the student that sponsored it was able to obtain seven sponsors and then it just gradually rose in our discussion and they finally passed it. This is before—so the two co-signatories Kazakhstan and Kenya must agree with the resolution at the beginning. This is in a UN simulation typically.

Here you can see people phoning. Very exciting. And a resolution from Canada on peacekeeping. What might they think? Basically it would never even get into this room. It will never get to the United Nations. I brought it up to show you that some ideas are domestic proposals and ideas meant to ferment debate and discussion uh in the wake of threats to annex Canada and that Canada would become a 51st state. Can you use these preambular phrases? So these are some sample ones. There's many. I just let you—you don't have to memorize those. Please don't memorize them. Welcoming, taking into account, keeping in mind.

And here are the operative clauses. Call upon, designate, express, express hope, further, invite. See how general they are and how gentle they are. It's not "demand." UN General Assembly sample resolutions from my classroom here. Uh we're sitting at the UN on the third floor here. Um, consensus important. So, I mentioned this that all member states could agree to a resolution without taking a vote. If they agree on the text, but there's just one member state—Iran or Israel or—but not Palestine because it can't vote—that requests a vote, then consensus is not reached. Um, and I've seen that actually at the UN with Palestine standing outside on the newsroom arguing against a resolution.

Here are the happy writers, particularly Randy Rydell, uh, who managed to reach a consensus among 193 countries on the 2010 resolution and that was passed with the 64 planks—the 64 operative clauses. So, he's looking very happy. And I took this picture of him because he should be happy. And here's some more happy people back in 2010. And there's Jim Wurst who also wrote many reports that fed into that.

And then finally, uh, Jonathan Granoff, who you heard from in my other class uh speaking—the President of the Global Security Institute—and Alice Slater, who is a New York City um civil society representative, smiling because it was adopted by consensus. You would not get consensus on my resolution for a made-in-Canada peacekeeping force, but it's worth me introducing it to you as a way to teach you about consensus. Thank you for listening today.
# Transcript 5D

...or to the cloud. Hi everyone. I'm really happy to introduce you to Leah Holla who is uh a student and also at McGill University studying physics—has already studied physics. You know what? I've got to stop it because this woman, the crazy janitor, has come again.

Just going to record the janitor going by. I think it's kind of amusing. We're—we're trying to talk. Um and she's just going to take a little tour and—and go away. Uh hopefully I'll just uh close the door. Sorry about this, Leah. I really... Okay, sorry about that students. Uh the janitor often works late in the evening, but I—I never know when that's going to happen. Um so Leah's here. Thank you very much. Leah's extraordinarily busy today, and we'll talk about that—why. So I was really pleased to book this—this appointment. Um, and this week we're talking about the United Nations. So, I'm going to introduce uh Leah by sharing a—a picture, if you don't mind, of um the United Nations. And here we are. Um, shouldn't have done that before. Leah, here we are. Our guest speaker, UN—former UN youth intern, Leah Holla.

Uh so Leah uh was part of a UN initiative called "Leaders for Tomorrow" and she's going to talk a little bit about that with us and then she became the Executive Director of the International Physicians for the Prevention of Nuclear War, which is a huge organization around the world, and she was Executive Director of the Canadian branch, which is also very large. Leah previously worked in um various programs and so on from the medical perspective and the neurology perspective but now is focused on physics. And then let me go to the next slide. Uh on campus she works with—well she did work when—with Students for Peace and Disarmament, a group that she co-founded in first year and that is trying to still cut ties with the military-industrial complex by divesting and ceasing research for harmful weapons manufacturers, creating a community for peace activism. Uh she also worked on different programs; for example, I underlined this one at Yale University but also a youth-run social justice overnight camp in BC on Gabriola and worked as a political campaigns coordinator with her student union and grew up surrounded by nature. You're a BC-er from Vancouver Island. We'll talk a little bit about feminism, I hope. And I just want to mention this "Leaders for Tomorrow" program. Leah, is this program still in existence? I—I see here there's a contact with the United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs. Can you tell the students a little bit about that?

Happily and thank you so much for having me on, Dr. Simpson. Um the United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs has a "Youth for Disarmament" branch of which the website is right here and they have various annual programs that they run. They come out of the United Nations Security Council Resolution, I believe 2250, on Youth, Peace and Security. Um so really fortunately at the highest level of governance it's been affirmed that youth and students have a role to play in protecting peace and security and engaging on nuclear disarmament. Um, so out of that resolution came an opportunity for states to give funding. And you'll see on the bottom left, uh, it says that this program was funded by the Republic of Korea, which generously gave $10 million to, um, give opportunities to 25 folks selected from around the world. And I was very um, I felt very fortunate to be selected as one of them for them.

That's South Korea. That's excellent. And they gave how much money? They gave 10 million which was put into a couple different programs, one of which was this program. Um so that funded various educational um initiatives online for us followed by uh over two years followed by um two trips to the United Nations during First Committee week. So during the disarmament— First Committee. Okay. Let's go to the next slide because I just want to mention that your career was launched and here we see on Instagram still there uh you are part of distinguished speakers marking the global launch of UNODA's new disarmament education strategy. So tell us a little bit about this—this huge initiative—well funded. I've circled you in green there.

I was grateful, very grateful for—for that opportunity and and for the ODA staff for setting it up and—and ensuring youth representation on the panel. Um the disarmament education strategy was really a full-circle moment for me because um I got involved in disarmament when I was in high school. Uh a teacher had a guest on—um had a guest come in, Tamara Lorincz, who who spoke on military spending and disarmament and I got to reading um and if it hadn't been for that teacher I wouldn't have—uh or the guest speaker or later mentors who I met—um I wouldn't have become involved in disarmament. So uh in my work later I started to work with—with teachers and teachers' unions giving workshops on how to teach on disarmament education. So uh as a member of the cohort they invited me to help launch—uh to—to give consultation and—and speak at the launch of the United Nations disarmament education strategy. So this was the—the first of its kind, the first edition in 2022. Um and I highly recommend reading it if you're interested in the arena of disarmament education. It's really, really full of—of advice.

Well, there's many, many interns at the UN that are very fortunate and that they get to work in New York City. I—I wanted to show the students this picture of the Hudson River and the back of the UN where um people who are visiting never see—uh but this is for diplomats and I was wondering if you ever got a chance to—to tour this area at the back of the UN.

Gratefully I did. Yeah. The—the United Nations staff running the program took us all for a tour uh including some of the more off-limit areas such as the rose garden and, you know, the—the UN is a very—can be a tense environment so I think a lot of the most wonderful conversations and connections can happen in infrastructure like this outside by the roses but I felt very— And that's where they smoke as well so you don't have to smoke to go out there to talk to them; you can just be out there and talk to, you know, where the smokers... This is uh one of the UN cafeterias. Uh and I was wondering if you ever had a chance to go here and what kind of place that this is.

I yeah was grateful to have the—the opportunity to go to the—the cafeterias as well. I think similar to the rose garden, a lot of the most uh important, meaningful conversations happen over food or outdoors, kind of outside of the arena of the General Assembly where people are—are reading pre-written texts or responding to each other in a more um diplomatic way, less—less free-flowing. So, uh, yeah, the UN cafeteria and general spaces around the UN are more open for—for free-flowing conversation and people just approaching each other. Often if you see someone you want to talk to in the General Assembly, you'll approach them after at the UN cafeteria or kind of follow them out into the hallway area after.

I noticed uh on last week in Ottawa that you were very comfortable with all the diplomats and people from Foreign Affairs coming up and speaking to you and you—I—I was watching you and you're just completely comfortable with having those sorts of conversations and engaging. So that's—that's—this was a—a good training ground for—for what we're going to talk about in a few minutes. Uh my last slide here is the cafeteria um from a different perspective and where important information—but not secret information—is exchanged. It's information that diplomats want to kind of release so that the uh civil society knows the direction that they're going. So I put a picture here of the couches, very old, from the 1960s, and that's what the United Nations looks like. Did you want to comment?

Yeah, I—this is I—I think you—you described it really accurately. There's also another cafeteria which is diplomats only. So no civil society, no lobbyist, nobody who's not a diplomat is—is allowed. So if—um if they want to have a more p—private conversation, they'll go there. But this is—this is where normally we approach them as—as civil society.

That's great. Um so now I wanted to talk with you, Leah, about the activities that you're doing now because you're very, very effective. You've just pulled together, I think, more than 20, 25—I don't know, I'll know in a few minutes—organizations writing a letter. So you drafted the letter and then of course you used Chat or AI through McGill to just smooth out the letter a little to make it more um shorter and then uh you took the letter and suddenly you contacted all 25 organizations and asked each of us—I—was representing the Canadian Peace Research Association as the president—to sign the letter. And this letter—do you want to tell the students about what motivated you to write the letter and why we're all signing it in a hurry today?

Yeah. Well, I—it's a collective effort and I'm really grateful that—that folks are willing to—to come together. Um, so we're just coming out of the government consultations in Ottawa and it feels like a really crucial moment and crucial week to be paying attention to the choices of world leaders and—and holding them accountable for—for the security not only nationally but also internationally. As um your students know, uh the New START treaty expires tomorrow, February—or February 4th, I believe. Um and uh there's going to be no arms control on the two largest nuclear arsenals of which Canada is sandwiched. It lies right—right in the middle. Um Canada has—has a really important role not only geographically but also as a middle power. Um, and we live in a democracy where we're—we have structures to hold our leaders accountable. Um, but one really unfortunate thing we're—we're seeing is a lot of the government decisions being um made don't completely match with the rhetoric that we have been—have been saying about our role as a middle power. Um, historically, Canada has played a role in uh, facilitating and encouraging arms control conversations through mediating diplomacy. However, right now we're seeing a drastic cut to all diplomatic endeavors, including Global Affairs Canada. Um, and it's not finalized yet, but that risks—are—the arms control unit and the disarmament unit. We only have a very small team of people who work full-time on disarmament and nuclear disarmament specifically. Um, and despite uh no arms control and—and major global regression and—and the clock being set 85 seconds to midnight, um we're seeing that it's being considered that uh they cut the—the very little resources that are—that are being put towards our diplomatic efforts. So um now feels like a really important moment to be defending the existing institutions uh including diplomacy and diplomatic institutions that we have here in Canada as well as internationally—the United Nations, you know—but for—for this very moment I think um it's important uh...

Yeah, and your letter definitely underlined that in one page essentially that we do need to uh prioritize Global Affairs Canada and the amount—amount of money that they spend on international fora like the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty Review Conference that's coming up this spring in April-June and also for possibly in the future that Canada might attend like the TPNW Review Conference in November. And then also you mentioned to disarmament education which is an international priority. Yeah, they were—we're not—I—I need to mention to the students that the consultations that Leah and I were attending were um with the government and there was 20 people there from civil society that are selected as the leaders of civil society, as representatives of different places and organizations. And and there's also 20 online including Tariq Rauf who we interviewed for the class. And then there was another 20 people from Global Affairs Canada including different ambassadors in Geneva and so on. And all of them were—I got to admit—quite depressed because they are trying to figure out how to spend 15% less of their budget, including 15% less personnel. So, they were all, I would say, miserable. Wouldn't you, Leah? They were miserable at the world's situation and they were miserable about their own situations. Um, and it was sad, but students can still get jobs because all the younger ones had—were not worried; they were still going—going to be retained and so on. Did you want to mention about what they mean by Chatham House Rules when—when they announced at the beginning Chatham House Rules? They always do that; every single international forum is governed by Chatham House Rules. What's your understanding?

My understanding is that we can talk about the content that was discussed but cannot in—attribute it to who said it. So we can share information that we gained and use it in our work. However, we cannot say that we heard this fact from this source. We can't change government...

We—we have to remember when I asked that one question about the—the um China testing two nuclear weapons a week—that was said by someone. Well, I knew full well it was that person who was at the, you know, but I just said "by someone" and then he piped up, "but it was me" later. That was so funny. But anyway, then I—well I deliberately forgot it was you. Um, but it's that kind of informal discussion where we were—we are allowed to say that we spoke at length about China and we talked a lot about the "Golden Dome." Trump's vision of a Golden Dome. Um, what else do we talk about? It was a long discussion. Um, many, many things uh but—but the whole point being they are consulting with us in Ottawa and with different organizations. So I was very impressed. You spoke a couple of times by—by—and the way they do it is you have to put your name tag up and then the chair recognizes you and then they focus fully on you, including on the big screen. So there's four huge screens and then there's 12 screens in front of us. So it's blasting. Tell us a little bit about how you got up the courage to speak in—in front of such a large group of experts because you did really well twice.

Well, thank you very much, Erica. I—I feel very grateful um to have also been encouraged to speak by yourself and other members of civil society. Um in advance, I put some time into thinking about uh what priorities were going into the meeting and including um thinking about what other people were saying and having notes on things that I didn't want to be left unsaid. Um, one of which included the rolling back of Canada's feminist foreign policy, which is really disappointing in—in the context of global gender aggression. Um, that was the second remark and I—I waited till the end to see if it would come up by another.

Yeah, you waited and no one brought it up except for you, which was shocking. Um, it was like Trudeau's feminist policy just went out the window and then finally Leah brings it up and we all go, "Oh, oh, right. Oh, right. We're supposed to be talking about that." Oh, yeah. Good for you. Good for you.

Well, I mean, it—it's uh it's definitely a frightening time when there's so many issues at hand. Um, and but they're—they're all inextricably connected and I—I don't think it does nuclear disarmament any favors to be rolling back language on gender. I mean, I think a lot of also nuclear weapons dialogue is—is spoken about in a hyper masculine—masculine way. At least my perspective—not necessarily any of the orgs I work for—that they—by working on nuclear disarmament, you're—you're um furthering gender justice. And by working on gender justice, you're furthering um you're furthering disarmament policy.

And—and did you notice when you worked for International Physicians against—uh oh boy, IPPNW? Tell me again what it is. International... The International Physicians for the Prevention of Nuclear War Canada. Thank you. Okay, I keep forgetting. Um, did you notice that they were focused on a more feminist uh approach or—or a more gender—gender justice?

Yeah, I—I don't think—well I don't think anyone in the—or many people in the—or are against that approach by any means. The specifics of IPPNW is a health focus. So looking at nuclear weapons from a medical perspective um which I was very grateful to do and to learn in that space. It's very—it's evidence-based and—and speaking from the facts and it's a matter of fact that the only—the only way to cure a nuclear disaster is prevention. Medicine has nothing to offer in the face of—of nuclear warfare. So, um, for example, uh, like a a paralleled note would be that, uh, once, uh, the NRA tweeted, um, "doctors need to stay in their lane" and anti-gun—"doctors need to stay in their lane." Um, but it was, I think, um, a member of the American IPPNW tweeted back, um, "We are the people who see the bullet holes. We—we treat the outcomes." So, you know, prevention is the only way, and I think paralleled with—with nuclear weapons, the only way forward is—is a prohibition. Um but I was grateful to—while working with IPPNW—volunteer with Canadian Voice of Women for Peace, Women's International League for Peace and Freedom. Uh Ray Acheson, who you mentioned was in one of the photos—um read a lot of their writing. Carol Cohn—um I think feminist literature—and was a part of my thinking.

Very interesting. Well, what that does um uh lead me to talk—not—I—I'm so fascinated by this, but we do have to keep our recording to approximately 15 minutes—is um if you—you were the Executive Director and now you're—you're actually going back to school to do more physics and you were telling me that you're learning more French, 10 hours a week of French. So, I was wondering why you're doing that. Do you think that you need to be fluently bilingual? Because I noticed last week in Ottawa that most of the foreign service officers were not fluently bilingual—only a few. But then you could see that their careers might be advancing quicker. Um, so that was—one of my—has always been my thought that if you are fluently bilingual—and French is your first language too—then that gives you more opportunities not just in uh the Department of Global Affairs Canada now, but also in the Department of National Defense or in the Privy Council Office. Do you want to talk a little bit about why you're learning French?

Yeah, happily. Um, I mean, I feel like French is a really good—a very practical investment of my time. So, I'm trying to get to the level of fluency as fast as possible. Um, I think I—I stepped down from my IPPNWC to take a little time to invest in my own education. I don't think that's something I'll ever regret. And I, yeah, French feels like a very practical use for many fields. I know I want to work internationally or at a minimum um on international issues. Um and to be able to speak in both Canada's second language and a UN language feels—feels worthwhile.

That's great. That's really positive. Um and I've told the students before about the Explore program that they can apply for uh in order to take French at a university—even in New Brunswick uh or even in Toronto at Glendon. And you're learning French as well. Are you—what program are you using? Just for the students to know, is it Duolingo?

Sure. Yeah, I—I uh I actually did Explore a couple years ago. I highly recommend that as well. Um and I use Duolingo and also I'm taking courses in my community in Montreal. Um... Yes, you're in Montreal, so therefore you're being immersed right away. Oh, that's wonderful. Um well, thank you, Leah. I really appreciate this opportunity and I'm sure you motivated uh students to think about working—if they can't work for the UN or let's say they're a nurse or they're—they're in uh aviation. Can they somehow—can work for what you said the other day—the greater good? What can—you want to end on those kind of comments about how people can perhaps—not even—you don't have to work for the UN to work for the greater good?

Absolutely. I mean, there's a role for all of us to play. There's no one-size-fits-all or one path to—to contributing to nuclear disarmament or these issues at large. Um I say just find what you're passionate about, find—find it what you're passionate about, find what you're good at, whether that's writing, whether that's art, whether that's science, whether that's health, and um find—be creative in—in applying it. And we need people from all different backgrounds thinking about these issues um and working on them. You know, the—the chances are that we'll only be able to make a small difference, but it's very important that you try and make that small difference because it's going to take all of us um in order to—to protect our world and especially in the state of current affairs. So, um I hope—I hope that—I hope that...

Well, those words are very, very inspiring and I—and I want to thank you again Leah for taking time out of—out of this very, very busy day for coming on and also um I wish you luck in the future with whatever endeavors you take on. I'm sure you'll be very successful. Thank you.

Thanks for the invitation. Happy to be here.